In which it is proved that, notwithstanding their names’ ending in OS
and IS, the heroes of the story which we are about to have the honor to
relate to our readers have nothing mythological about them.

A short time ago, while making researches in the Royal Library for my
History of Louis XIV, I stumbled by chance upon the Memoirs of M.
d’Artagnan, printed--as were most of the works of that period, in which
authors could not tell the truth without the risk of a residence, more
or less long, in the Bastille--at Amsterdam, by Pierre Rouge. The title
attracted me; I took them home with me, with the permission of the
guardian, and devoured them.

It is not my intention here to enter into an analysis of this curious
work; and I shall satisfy myself with referring such of my readers as
appreciate the pictures of the period to its pages. They will therein
find portraits penciled by the hand of a master; and although these
squibs may be, for the most part, traced upon the doors of barracks and
the walls of cabarets, they will not find the likenesses of Louis XIII,
Anne of Austria, Richelieu, Mazarin, and the courtiers of the period,
less faithful than in the history of M. Anquetil.

But, it is well known, what strikes the capricious mind of the poet is
not always what affects the mass of readers. Now, while admiring, as
others doubtless will admire, the details we have to relate, our main
preoccupation concerned a matter to which no one before ourselves had
given a thought.

D’Artagnan relates that on his first visit to M. de Treville, captain of
the king’s Musketeers, he met in the antechamber three young men,
serving in the illustrious corps into which he was soliciting the honor
of being received, bearing the names of Athos, Porthos, and Aramis.

We must confess these three strange names struck us; and it immediately
occurred to us that they were but pseudonyms, under which d’Artagnan had
disguised names perhaps illustrious, or else that the bearers of these
borrowed names had themselves chosen them on the day in which, from
caprice, discontent, or want of fortune, they had donned the simple
Musketeer’s uniform.

From that moment we had no rest till we could find some trace in
contemporary works of these extraordinary names which had so strongly
awakened our curiosity.

The catalogue alone of the books we read with this object would fill a
whole chapter, which, although it might be very instructive, would
certainly afford our readers but little amusement. It will suffice,
then, to tell them that at the moment at which, discouraged by so many
fruitless investigations, we were about to abandon our search, we at
length found, guided by the counsels of our illustrious friend Paulin
Paris, a manuscript in folio, endorsed 4772 or 4773, we do not recollect
which, having for title, “Memoirs of the Comte de la Fere, Touching Some
Events Which Passed in France Toward the End of the Reign of King Louis
XIII and the Commencement of the Reign of King Louis XIV.”

It may be easily imagined how great was our joy when, in turning over
this manuscript, our last hope, we found at the twentieth page the name
of Athos, at the twenty-seventh the name of Porthos, and at the
thirty-first the name of Aramis.

The discovery of a completely unknown manuscript at a period in which
historical science is carried to such a high degree appeared almost
miraculous. We hastened, therefore, to obtain permission to print it,
with the view of presenting ourselves someday with the pack of others at
the doors of the Academie des Inscriptions et Belles Lettres, if we
should not succeed--a very probable thing, by the by--in gaining
admission to the Academie Francaise with our own proper pack. This
permission, we feel bound to say, was graciously granted; which compels
us here to give a public contradiction to the slanderers who pretend
that we live under a government but moderately indulgent to men of
letters.

Now, this is the first part of this precious manuscript which we offer
to our readers, restoring it to the title which belongs to it, and
entering into an engagement that if (of which we have no doubt) this
first part should obtain the success it merits, we will publish the
second immediately.

In the meanwhile, as the godfather is a second father, we beg the reader
to lay to our account, and not to that of the Comte de la Fere, the
pleasure or the ENNUI he may experience.

This being understood, let us proceed with our history.




1 THE THREE PRESENTS OF D’ARTAGNAN THE ELDER


On the first Monday of the month of April, 1625, the market town of
Meung, in which the author of ROMANCE OF THE ROSE was born, appeared to
be in as perfect a state of revolution as if the Huguenots had just made
a second La Rochelle of it. Many citizens, seeing the women flying
toward the High Street, leaving their children crying at the open doors,
hastened to don the cuirass, and supporting their somewhat uncertain
courage with a musket or a partisan, directed their steps toward the
hostelry of the Jolly Miller, before which was gathered, increasing
every minute, a compact group, vociferous and full of curiosity.

In those times panics were common, and few days passed without some city
or other registering in its archives an event of this kind. There were
nobles, who made war against each other; there was the king, who made
war against the cardinal; there was Spain, which made war against the
king. Then, in addition to these concealed or public, secret or open
wars, there were robbers, mendicants, Huguenots, wolves, and scoundrels,
who made war upon everybody. The citizens always took up arms readily
against thieves, wolves or scoundrels, often against nobles or
Huguenots, sometimes against the king, but never against the cardinal or
Spain. It resulted, then, from this habit that on the said first Monday
of April, 1625, the citizens, on hearing the clamor, and seeing neither
the red-and-yellow standard nor the livery of the Duc de Richelieu,
rushed toward the hostel of the Jolly Miller. When arrived there, the
cause of the hubbub was apparent to all.

A young man--we can sketch his portrait at a dash. Imagine to yourself a
Don Quixote of eighteen; a Don Quixote without his corselet, without his
coat of mail, without his cuisses; a Don Quixote clothed in a woolen
doublet, the blue color of which had faded into a nameless shade between
lees of wine and a heavenly azure; face long and brown; high cheek
bones, a sign of sagacity; the maxillary muscles enormously developed,
an infallible sign by which a Gascon may always be detected, even
without his cap--and our young man wore a cap set off with a sort of
feather; the eye open and intelligent; the nose hooked, but finely
chiseled. Too big for a youth, too small for a grown man, an experienced
eye might have taken him for a farmer’s son upon a journey had it not
been for the long sword which, dangling from a leather baldric, hit
against the calves of its owner as he walked, and against the rough side
of his steed when he was on horseback.

For our young man had a steed which was the observed of all observers.
It was a Bearn pony, from twelve to fourteen years old, yellow in his
hide, without a hair in his tail, but not without windgalls on his legs,
which, though going with his head lower than his knees, rendering a
martingale quite unnecessary, contrived nevertheless to perform his
eight leagues a day. Unfortunately, the qualities of this horse were so
well concealed under his strange-colored hide and his unaccountable
gait, that at a time when everybody was a connoisseur in horseflesh, the
appearance of the aforesaid pony at Meung--which place he had entered
about a quarter of an hour before, by the gate of Beaugency--produced an
unfavorable feeling, which extended to his rider.

And this feeling had been more painfully perceived by young
d’Artagnan--for so was the Don Quixote of this second Rosinante
named--from his not being able to conceal from himself the ridiculous
appearance that such a steed gave him, good horseman as he was. He had
sighed deeply, therefore, when accepting the gift of the pony from M.
d’Artagnan the elder. He was not ignorant that such a beast was worth at
least twenty livres; and the words which had accompanied the present
were above all price.

“My son,” said the old Gascon gentleman, in that pure Bearn PATOIS of
which Henry IV could never rid himself, “this horse was born in the
house of your father about thirteen years ago, and has remained in it
ever since, which ought to make you love it. Never sell it; allow it to
die tranquilly and honorably of old age, and if you make a campaign with
it, take as much care of it as you would of an old servant. At court,
provided you have ever the honor to go there,” continued M. d’Artagnan
the elder, “--an honor to which, remember, your ancient nobility gives
you the right--sustain worthily your name of gentleman, which has been
worthily borne by your ancestors for five hundred years, both for your
own sake and the sake of those who belong to you. By the latter I mean
your relatives and friends. Endure nothing from anyone except Monsieur
the Cardinal and the king. It is by his courage, please observe, by his
courage alone, that a gentleman can make his way nowadays. Whoever
hesitates for a second perhaps allows the bait to escape which during
that exact second fortune held out to him. You are young. You ought to
be brave for two reasons: the first is that you are a Gascon, and the
second is that you are my son. Never fear quarrels, but seek adventures.
I have taught you how to handle a sword; you have thews of iron, a wrist
of steel. Fight on all occasions. Fight the more for duels being
forbidden, since consequently there is twice as much courage in
fighting. I have nothing to give you, my son, but fifteen crowns, my
horse, and the counsels you have just heard. Your mother will add to
them a recipe for a certain balsam, which she had from a Bohemian and
which has the miraculous virtue of curing all wounds that do not reach
the heart. Take advantage of all, and live happily and long. I have but
one word to add, and that is to propose an example to you--not mine, for
I myself have never appeared at court, and have only taken part in
religious wars as a volunteer; I speak of Monsieur de Treville, who was
formerly my neighbor, and who had the honor to be, as a child, the
play-fellow of our king, Louis XIII, whom God preserve! Sometimes their
play degenerated into battles, and in these battles the king was not
always the stronger. The blows which he received increased greatly his
esteem and friendship for Monsieur de Treville. Afterward, Monsieur de
Treville fought with others: in his first journey to Paris, five times;
from the death of the late king till the young one came of age, without
reckoning wars and sieges, seven times; and from that date up to the
present day, a hundred times, perhaps! So that in spite of edicts,
ordinances, and decrees, there he is, captain of the Musketeers; that is
to say, chief of a legion of Caesars, whom the king holds in great
esteem and whom the cardinal dreads--he who dreads nothing, as it is
said. Still further, Monsieur de Treville gains ten thousand crowns a
year; he is therefore a great noble. He began as you begin. Go to him
with this letter, and make him your model in order that you may do as he
has done.”

Upon which M. d’Artagnan the elder girded his own sword round his son,
kissed him tenderly on both cheeks, and gave him his benediction.

On leaving the paternal chamber, the young man found his mother, who was
waiting for him with the famous recipe of which the counsels we have
just repeated would necessitate frequent employment. The adieux were on
this side longer and more tender than they had been on the other--not
that M. d’Artagnan did not love his son, who was his only offspring, but
M. d’Artagnan was a man, and he would have considered it unworthy of a
man to give way to his feelings; whereas Mme. d’Artagnan was a woman,
and still more, a mother. She wept abundantly; and--let us speak it to
the praise of M. d’Artagnan the younger--notwithstanding the efforts he
made to remain firm, as a future Musketeer ought, nature prevailed, and
he shed many tears, of which he succeeded with great difficulty in
concealing the half.

The same day the young man set forward on his journey, furnished with
the three paternal gifts, which consisted, as we have said, of fifteen
crowns, the horse, and the letter for M. de Treville--the counsels being
thrown into the bargain.

With such a VADE MECUM d’Artagnan was morally and physically an exact
copy of the hero of Cervantes, to whom we so happily compared him when
our duty of an historian placed us under the necessity of sketching his
portrait. Don Quixote took windmills for giants, and sheep for armies;
d’Artagnan took every smile for an insult, and every look as a
provocation--whence it resulted that from Tarbes to Meung his fist was
constantly doubled, or his hand on the hilt of his sword; and yet the
fist did not descend upon any jaw, nor did the sword issue from its
scabbard. It was not that the sight of the wretched pony did not excite
numerous smiles on the countenances of passers-by; but as against the
side of this pony rattled a sword of respectable length, and as over
this sword gleamed an eye rather ferocious than haughty, these
passers-by repressed their hilarity, or if hilarity prevailed over
prudence, they endeavored to laugh only on one side, like the masks of
the ancients. D’Artagnan, then, remained majestic and intact in his
susceptibility, till he came to this unlucky city of Meung.

But there, as he was alighting from his horse at the gate of the Jolly
Miller, without anyone--host, waiter, or hostler--coming to hold his
stirrup or take his horse, d’Artagnan spied, though an open window on
the ground floor, a gentleman, well-made and of good carriage, although
of rather a stern countenance, talking with two persons who appeared to
listen to him with respect. D’Artagnan fancied quite naturally,
according to his custom, that he must be the object of their
conversation, and listened. This time d’Artagnan was only in part
mistaken; he himself was not in question, but his horse was. The
gentleman appeared to be enumerating all his qualities to his auditors;
and, as I have said, the auditors seeming to have great deference for
the narrator, they every moment burst into fits of laughter. Now, as a
half-smile was sufficient to awaken the irascibility of the young man,
the effect produced upon him by this vociferous mirth may be easily
imagined.

Nevertheless, d’Artagnan was desirous of examining the appearance of
this impertinent personage who ridiculed him. He fixed his haughty eye
upon the stranger, and perceived a man of from forty to forty-five years
of age, with black and piercing eyes, pale complexion, a strongly marked
nose, and a black and well-shaped mustache. He was dressed in a doublet
and hose of a violet color, with aiguillettes of the same color, without
any other ornaments than the customary slashes, through which the shirt
appeared. This doublet and hose, though new, were creased, like
traveling clothes for a long time packed in a portmanteau. D’Artagnan
made all these remarks with the rapidity of a most minute observer, and
doubtless from an instinctive feeling that this stranger was destined to
have a great influence over his future life.

Now, as at the moment in which d’Artagnan fixed his eyes upon the
gentleman in the violet doublet, the gentleman made one of his most
knowing and profound remarks respecting the Bearnese pony, his two
auditors laughed even louder than before, and he himself, though
contrary to his custom, allowed a pale smile (if I may be allowed to use
such an expression) to stray over his countenance. This time there could
be no doubt; d’Artagnan was really insulted. Full, then, of this
conviction, he pulled his cap down over his eyes, and endeavoring to
copy some of the court airs he had picked up in Gascony among young
traveling nobles, he advanced with one hand on the hilt of his sword and
the other resting on his hip. Unfortunately, as he advanced, his anger
increased at every step; and instead of the proper and lofty speech he
had prepared as a prelude to his challenge, he found nothing at the tip
of his tongue but a gross personality, which he accompanied with a
furious gesture.

“I say, sir, you sir, who are hiding yourself behind that shutter--yes,
you, sir, tell me what you are laughing at, and we will laugh together!”

The gentleman raised his eyes slowly from the nag to his cavalier, as if
he required some time to ascertain whether it could be to him that such
strange reproaches were addressed; then, when he could not possibly
entertain any doubt of the matter, his eyebrows slightly bent, and with
an accent of irony and insolence impossible to be described, he replied
to d’Artagnan, “I was not speaking to you, sir.”

“But I am speaking to you!” replied the young man, additionally
exasperated with this mixture of insolence and good manners, of
politeness and scorn.

The stranger looked at him again with a slight smile, and retiring from
the window, came out of the hostelry with a slow step, and placed
himself before the horse, within two paces of d’Artagnan. His quiet
manner and the ironical expression of his countenance redoubled the
mirth of the persons with whom he had been talking, and who still
remained at the window.

D’Artagnan, seeing him approach, drew his sword a foot out of the
scabbard.

“This horse is decidedly, or rather has been in his youth, a buttercup,”
resumed the stranger, continuing the remarks he had begun, and
addressing himself to his auditors at the window, without paying the
least attention to the exasperation of d’Artagnan, who, however, placed
himself between him and them. “It is a color very well known in botany,
but till the present time very rare among horses.”

“There are people who laugh at the horse that would not dare to laugh at
the master,” cried the young emulator of the furious Treville.

“I do not often laugh, sir,” replied the stranger, “as you may perceive
by the expression of my countenance; but nevertheless I retain the
privilege of laughing when I please.”

“And I,” cried d’Artagnan, “will allow no man to laugh when it
displeases me!”

“Indeed, sir,” continued the stranger, more calm than ever; “well, that
is perfectly right!” and turning on his heel, was about to re-enter the
hostelry by the front gate, beneath which d’Artagnan on arriving had
observed a saddled horse.

But, d’Artagnan was not of a character to allow a man to escape him thus
who had the insolence to ridicule him. He drew his sword entirely from
the scabbard, and followed him, crying, “Turn, turn, Master Joker, lest
I strike you behind!”

“Strike me!” said the other, turning on his heels, and surveying the
young man with as much astonishment as contempt. “Why, my good fellow,
you must be mad!” Then, in a suppressed tone, as if speaking to himself,
“This is annoying,” continued he. “What a godsend this would be for his
Majesty, who is seeking everywhere for brave fellows to recruit for his
Musketeers!”

He had scarcely finished, when d’Artagnan made such a furious lunge at
him that if he had not sprung nimbly backward, it is probable he would
have jested for the last time. The stranger, then perceiving that the
matter went beyond raillery, drew his sword, saluted his adversary, and
seriously placed himself on guard. But at the same moment, his two
auditors, accompanied by the host, fell upon d’Artagnan with sticks,
shovels and tongs. This caused so rapid and complete a diversion from
the attack that d’Artagnan’s adversary, while the latter turned round to
face this shower of blows, sheathed his sword with the same precision,
and instead of an actor, which he had nearly been, became a spectator of
the fight--a part in which he acquitted himself with his usual
impassiveness, muttering, nevertheless, “A plague upon these Gascons!
Replace him on his orange horse, and let him begone!”

“Not before I have killed you, poltroon!” cried d’Artagnan, making the
best face possible, and never retreating one step before his three
assailants, who continued to shower blows upon him.

“Another gasconade!” murmured the gentleman. “By my honor, these Gascons
are incorrigible! Keep up the dance, then, since he will have it so.
When he is tired, he will perhaps tell us that he has had enough of it.”

But the stranger knew not the headstrong personage he had to do with;
d’Artagnan was not the man ever to cry for quarter. The fight was
therefore prolonged for some seconds; but at length d’Artagnan dropped
his sword, which was broken in two pieces by the blow of a stick.
Another blow full upon his forehead at the same moment brought him to
the ground, covered with blood and almost fainting.

It was at this moment that people came flocking to the scene of action
from all sides. The host, fearful of consequences, with the help of his
servants carried the wounded man into the kitchen, where some trifling
attentions were bestowed upon him.

As to the gentleman, he resumed his place at the window, and surveyed
the crowd with a certain impatience, evidently annoyed by their
remaining undispersed.

“Well, how is it with this madman?” exclaimed he, turning round as the
noise of the door announced the entrance of the host, who came in to
inquire if he was unhurt.

“Your excellency is safe and sound?” asked the host.

“Oh, yes! Perfectly safe and sound, my good host; and I wish to know
what has become of our young man.”

“He is better,” said the host, “he fainted quite away.”

“Indeed!” said the gentleman.

“But before he fainted, he collected all his strength to challenge you,
and to defy you while challenging you.”

“Why, this fellow must be the devil in person!” cried the stranger.

“Oh, no, your Excellency, he is not the devil,” replied the host, with a
grin of contempt; “for during his fainting we rummaged his valise and
found nothing but a clean shirt and eleven crowns--which however, did
not prevent his saying, as he was fainting, that if such a thing had
happened in Paris, you should have cause to repent of it at a later
period.”

“Then,” said the stranger coolly, “he must be some prince in disguise.”

“I have told you this, good sir,” resumed the host, “in order that you
may be on your guard.”

“Did he name no one in his passion?”

“Yes; he struck his pocket and said, ‘We shall see what Monsieur de
Treville will think of this insult offered to his protege.’”

“Monsieur de Treville?” said the stranger, becoming attentive, “he put
his hand upon his pocket while pronouncing the name of Monsieur de
Treville? Now, my dear host, while your young man was insensible, you
did not fail, I am quite sure, to ascertain what that pocket contained.
What was there in it?”

“A letter addressed to Monsieur de Treville, captain of the Musketeers.”

“Indeed!”

“Exactly as I have the honor to tell your Excellency.”

The host, who was not endowed with great perspicacity, did not observe
the expression which his words had given to the physiognomy of the
stranger. The latter rose from the front of the window, upon the sill of
which he had leaned with his elbow, and knitted his brow like a man
disquieted.

“The devil!” murmured he, between his teeth. “Can Treville have set this
Gascon upon me? He is very young; but a sword thrust is a sword thrust,
whatever be the age of him who gives it, and a youth is less to be
suspected than an older man,” and the stranger fell into a reverie which
lasted some minutes. “A weak obstacle is sometimes sufficient to
overthrow a great design.

“Host,” said he, “could you not contrive to get rid of this frantic boy
for me? In conscience, I cannot kill him; and yet,” added he, with a
coldly menacing expression, “he annoys me. Where is he?”

“In my wife’s chamber, on the first flight, where they are dressing his
wounds.”

“His things and his bag are with him? Has he taken off his doublet?”

“On the contrary, everything is in the kitchen. But if he annoys you,
this young fool--”

“To be sure he does. He causes a disturbance in your hostelry, which
respectable people cannot put up with. Go; make out my bill and notify
my servant.”

“What, monsieur, will you leave us so soon?”

“You know that very well, as I gave my order to saddle my horse. Have
they not obeyed me?”

“It is done; as your Excellency may have observed, your horse is in the
great gateway, ready saddled for your departure.”

“That is well; do as I have directed you, then.”

“What the devil!” said the host to himself. “Can he be afraid of this
boy?” But an imperious glance from the stranger stopped him short; he
bowed humbly and retired.

“It is not necessary for Milady* to be seen by this fellow,” continued
the stranger. “She will soon pass; she is already late. I had better get
on horseback, and go and meet her. I should like, however, to know what
this letter addressed to Treville contains.”

    _*We are well aware that this term, milady, is only properly
            used when followed by a family name. But we find it thus
            in the manuscript, and we do not choose to take upon
            ourselves to alter it._

And the stranger, muttering to himself, directed his steps toward the
kitchen.

In the meantime, the host, who entertained no doubt that it was the
presence of the young man that drove the stranger from his hostelry,
re-ascended to his wife’s chamber, and found d’Artagnan just recovering
his senses. Giving him to understand that the police would deal with him
pretty severely for having sought a quarrel with a great lord--for in
the opinion of the host the stranger could be nothing less than a great
lord--he insisted that notwithstanding his weakness d’Artagnan should
get up and depart as quickly as possible. D’Artagnan, half stupefied,
without his doublet, and with his head bound up in a linen cloth, arose
then, and urged by the host, began to descend the stairs; but on
arriving at the kitchen, the first thing he saw was his antagonist
talking calmly at the step of a heavy carriage, drawn by two large
Norman horses.

His interlocutor, whose head appeared through the carriage window, was a
woman of from twenty to two-and-twenty years. We have already observed
with what rapidity d’Artagnan seized the expression of a countenance. He
perceived then, at a glance, that this woman was young and beautiful;
and her style of beauty struck him more forcibly from its being totally
different from that of the southern countries in which d’Artagnan had
hitherto resided. She was pale and fair, with long curls falling in
profusion over her shoulders, had large, blue, languishing eyes, rosy
lips, and hands of alabaster. She was talking with great animation with
the stranger.

“His Eminence, then, orders me--” said the lady.

“To return instantly to England, and to inform him as soon as the duke
leaves London.”

“And as to my other instructions?” asked the fair traveler.

“They are contained in this box, which you will not open until you are
on the other side of the Channel.”

“Very well; and you--what will you do?”

“I--I return to Paris.”

“What, without chastising this insolent boy?” asked the lady.

The stranger was about to reply; but at the moment he opened his mouth,
d’Artagnan, who had heard all, precipitated himself over the threshold
of the door.

“This insolent boy chastises others,” cried he; “and I hope that this
time he whom he ought to chastise will not escape him as before.”

“Will not escape him?” replied the stranger, knitting his brow.

“No; before a woman you would dare not fly, I presume?”

“Remember,” said Milady, seeing the stranger lay his hand on his sword,
“the least delay may ruin everything.”

“You are right,” cried the gentleman; “begone then, on your part, and I
will depart as quickly on mine.” And bowing to the lady, he sprang into
his saddle, while her coachman applied his whip vigorously to his
horses. The two interlocutors thus separated, taking opposite
directions, at full gallop.

“Pay him, booby!” cried the stranger to his servant, without checking
the speed of his horse; and the man, after throwing two or three silver
pieces at the foot of mine host, galloped after his master.

“Base coward! false gentleman!” cried d’Artagnan, springing forward, in
his turn, after the servant. But his wound had rendered him too weak to
support such an exertion. Scarcely had he gone ten steps when his ears
began to tingle, a faintness seized him, a cloud of blood passed over
his eyes, and he fell in the middle of the street, crying still,
“Coward! coward! coward!”

“He is a coward, indeed,” grumbled the host, drawing near to d’Artagnan,
and endeavoring by this little flattery to make up matters with the
young man, as the heron of the fable did with the snail he had despised
the evening before.

“Yes, a base coward,” murmured d’Artagnan; “but she--she was very
beautiful.”

“What she?” demanded the host.

“Milady,” faltered d’Artagnan, and fainted a second time.

“Ah, it’s all one,” said the host; “I have lost two customers, but this
one remains, of whom I am pretty certain for some days to come. There
will be eleven crowns gained.”

It is to be remembered that eleven crowns was just the sum that remained
in d’Artagnan’s purse.

The host had reckoned upon eleven days of confinement at a crown a day,
but he had reckoned without his guest. On the following morning at five
o’clock d’Artagnan arose, and descending to the kitchen without help,
asked, among other ingredients the list of which has not come down to
us, for some oil, some wine, and some rosemary, and with his mother’s
recipe in his hand composed a balsam, with which he anointed his
numerous wounds, replacing his bandages himself, and positively refusing
the assistance of any doctor, d’Artagnan walked about that same evening,
and was almost cured by the morrow.

But when the time came to pay for his rosemary, this oil, and the wine,
the only expense the master had incurred, as he had preserved a strict
abstinence--while on the contrary, the yellow horse, by the account of
the hostler at least, had eaten three times as much as a horse of his
size could reasonably be supposed to have done--d’Artagnan found nothing
in his pocket but his little old velvet purse with the eleven crowns it
contained; for as to the letter addressed to M. de Treville, it had
disappeared.

The young man commenced his search for the letter with the greatest
patience, turning out his pockets of all kinds over and over again,
rummaging and rerummaging in his valise, and opening and reopening his
purse; but when he found that he had come to the conviction that the
letter was not to be found, he flew, for the third time, into such a
rage as was near costing him a fresh consumption of wine, oil, and
rosemary--for upon seeing this hot-headed youth become exasperated and
threaten to destroy everything in the establishment if his letter were
not found, the host seized a spit, his wife a broom handle, and the
servants the same sticks they had used the day before.

“My letter of recommendation!” cried d’Artagnan, “my letter of
recommendation! or, the holy blood, I will spit you all like ortolans!”

Unfortunately, there was one circumstance which created a powerful
obstacle to the accomplishment of this threat; which was, as we have
related, that his sword had been in his first conflict broken in two,
and which he had entirely forgotten. Hence, it resulted when d’Artagnan
proceeded to draw his sword in earnest, he found himself purely and
simply armed with a stump of a sword about eight or ten inches in
length, which the host had carefully placed in the scabbard. As to the
rest of the blade, the master had slyly put that on one side to make
himself a larding pin.

But this deception would probably not have stopped our fiery young man
if the host had not reflected that the reclamation which his guest made
was perfectly just.

“But, after all,” said he, lowering the point of his spit, “where is
this letter?”

“Yes, where is this letter?” cried d’Artagnan. “In the first place, I
warn you that that letter is for Monsieur de Treville, and it must be
found, or if it is not found, he will know how to find it.”

His threat completed the intimidation of the host. After the king and
the cardinal, M. de Treville was the man whose name was perhaps most
frequently repeated by the military, and even by citizens. There was, to
be sure, Father Joseph, but his name was never pronounced but with a
subdued voice, such was the terror inspired by his Gray Eminence, as the
cardinal’s familiar was called.

Throwing down his spit, and ordering his wife to do the same with her
broom handle, and the servants with their sticks, he set the first
example of commencing an earnest search for the lost letter.

“Does the letter contain anything valuable?” demanded the host, after a
few minutes of useless investigation.

“Zounds! I think it does indeed!” cried the Gascon, who reckoned upon
this letter for making his way at court. “It contained my fortune!”

“Bills upon Spain?” asked the disturbed host.

“Bills upon his Majesty’s private treasury,” answered d’Artagnan, who,
reckoning upon entering into the king’s service in consequence of this
recommendation, believed he could make this somewhat hazardous reply
without telling of a falsehood.

“The devil!” cried the host, at his wit’s end.

“But it’s of no importance,” continued d’Artagnan, with natural
assurance; “it’s of no importance. The money is nothing; that letter was
everything. I would rather have lost a thousand pistoles than have lost
it.” He would not have risked more if he had said twenty thousand; but a
certain juvenile modesty restrained him.

A ray of light all at once broke upon the mind of the host as he was
giving himself to the devil upon finding nothing.

“That letter is not lost!” cried he.

“What!” cried d’Artagnan.

“No, it has been stolen from you.”

“Stolen? By whom?”

“By the gentleman who was here yesterday. He came down into the kitchen,
where your doublet was. He remained there some time alone. I would lay a
wager he has stolen it.”

“Do you think so?” answered d’Artagnan, but little convinced, as he knew
better than anyone else how entirely personal the value of this letter
was, and saw nothing in it likely to tempt cupidity. The fact was that
none of his servants, none of the travelers present, could have gained
anything by being possessed of this paper.

“Do you say,” resumed d’Artagnan, “that you suspect that impertinent
gentleman?”

“I tell you I am sure of it,” continued the host. “When I informed him
that your lordship was the protege of Monsieur de Treville, and that you
even had a letter for that illustrious gentleman, he appeared to be very
much disturbed, and asked me where that letter was, and immediately came
down into the kitchen, where he knew your doublet was.”

“Then that’s my thief,” replied d’Artagnan. “I will complain to Monsieur
de Treville, and Monsieur de Treville will complain to the king.” He
then drew two crowns majestically from his purse and gave them to the
host, who accompanied him, cap in hand, to the gate, and remounted his
yellow horse, which bore him without any further accident to the gate of
St. Antoine at Paris, where his owner sold him for three crowns, which
was a very good price, considering that d’Artagnan had ridden him hard
during the last stage. Thus the dealer to whom d’Artagnan sold him for
the nine livres did not conceal from the young man that he only gave
that enormous sum for him on the account of the originality of his
color.

Thus d’Artagnan entered Paris on foot, carrying his little packet under
his arm, and walked about till he found an apartment to be let on terms
suited to the scantiness of his means. This chamber was a sort of
garret, situated in the Rue des Fossoyeurs, near the Luxembourg.

As soon as the earnest money was paid, d’Artagnan took possession of his
lodging, and passed the remainder of the day in sewing onto his doublet
and hose some ornamental braiding which his mother had taken off an
almost-new doublet of the elder M. d’Artagnan, and which she had given
her son secretly. Next he went to the Quai de Feraille to have a new
blade put to his sword, and then returned toward the Louvre, inquiring
of the first Musketeer he met for the situation of the hotel of M. de
Treville, which proved to be in the Rue du Vieux-Colombier; that is to
say, in the immediate vicinity of the chamber hired by d’Artagnan--a
circumstance which appeared to furnish a happy augury for the success of
his journey.

After this, satisfied with the way in which he had conducted himself at
Meung, without remorse for the past, confident in the present, and full
of hope for the future, he retired to bed and slept the sleep of the
brave.

This sleep, provincial as it was, brought him to nine o’clock in the
morning; at which hour he rose, in order to repair to the residence of
M. de Treville, the third personage in the kingdom, in the paternal
estimation.




2 THE ANTECHAMBER OF M. DE TREVILLE


M de Troisville, as his family was still called in Gascony, or M. de
Treville, as he has ended by styling himself in Paris, had really
commenced life as d’Artagnan now did; that is to say, without a sou in
his pocket, but with a fund of audacity, shrewdness, and intelligence
which makes the poorest Gascon gentleman often derive more in his hope
from the paternal inheritance than the richest Perigordian or Berrichan
gentleman derives in reality from his. His insolent bravery, his still
more insolent success at a time when blows poured down like hail, had
borne him to the top of that difficult ladder called Court Favor, which
he had climbed four steps at a time.

He was the friend of the king, who honored highly, as everyone knows,
the memory of his father, Henry IV. The father of M. de Treville had
served him so faithfully in his wars against the league that in default
of money--a thing to which the Bearnais was accustomed all his life, and
who constantly paid his debts with that of which he never stood in need
of borrowing, that is to say, with ready wit--in default of money, we
repeat, he authorized him, after the reduction of Paris, to assume for
his arms a golden lion passant upon gules, with the motto FIDELIS ET
FORTIS. This was a great matter in the way of honor, but very little in
the way of wealth; so that when the illustrious companion of the great
Henry died, the only inheritance he was able to leave his son was his
sword and his motto. Thanks to this double gift and the spotless name
that accompanied it, M. de Treville was admitted into the household of
the young prince where he made such good use of his sword, and was so
faithful to his motto, that Louis XIII, one of the good blades of his
kingdom, was accustomed to say that if he had a friend who was about to
fight, he would advise him to choose as a second, himself first, and
Treville next--or even, perhaps, before himself.

Thus Louis XIII had a real liking for Treville--a royal liking, a
self-interested liking, it is true, but still a liking. At that unhappy
period it was an important consideration to be surrounded by such men as
Treville. Many might take for their device the epithet STRONG, which
formed the second part of his motto, but very few gentlemen could lay
claim to the FAITHFUL, which constituted the first. Treville was one of
these latter. His was one of those rare organizations, endowed with an
obedient intelligence like that of the dog; with a blind valor, a quick
eye, and a prompt hand; to whom sight appeared only to be given to see
if the king were dissatisfied with anyone, and the hand to strike this
displeasing personage, whether a Besme, a Maurevers, a Poltiot de Mere,
or a Vitry. In short, up to this period nothing had been wanting to
Treville but opportunity; but he was ever on the watch for it, and he
faithfully promised himself that he would not fail to seize it by its
three hairs whenever it came within reach of his hand. At last Louis
XIII made Treville the captain of his Musketeers, who were to Louis XIII
in devotedness, or rather in fanaticism, what his Ordinaries had been to
Henry III, and his Scotch Guard to Louis XI.

On his part, the cardinal was not behind the king in this respect. When
he saw the formidable and chosen body with which Louis XIII had
surrounded himself, this second, or rather this first king of France,
became desirous that he, too, should have his guard. He had his
Musketeers therefore, as Louis XIII had his, and these two powerful
rivals vied with each other in procuring, not only from all the
provinces of France, but even from all foreign states, the most
celebrated swordsmen. It was not uncommon for Richelieu and Louis XIII
to dispute over their evening game of chess upon the merits of their
servants. Each boasted the bearing and the courage of his own people.
While exclaiming loudly against duels and brawls, they excited them
secretly to quarrel, deriving an immoderate satisfaction or genuine
regret from the success or defeat of their own combatants. We learn this
from the memoirs of a man who was concerned in some few of these defeats
and in many of these victories.

Treville had grasped the weak side of his master; and it was to this
address that he owed the long and constant favor of a king who has not
left the reputation behind him of being very faithful in his
friendships. He paraded his Musketeers before the Cardinal Armand
Duplessis with an insolent air which made the gray moustache of his
Eminence curl with ire. Treville understood admirably the war method of
that period, in which he who could not live at the expense of the enemy
must live at the expense of his compatriots. His soldiers formed a
legion of devil-may-care fellows, perfectly undisciplined toward all but
himself.

Loose, half-drunk, imposing, the king’s Musketeers, or rather M. de
Treville’s, spread themselves about in the cabarets, in the public
walks, and the public sports, shouting, twisting their mustaches,
clanking their swords, and taking great pleasure in annoying the Guards
of the cardinal whenever they could fall in with them; then drawing in
the open streets, as if it were the best of all possible sports;
sometimes killed, but sure in that case to be both wept and avenged;
often killing others, but then certain of not rotting in prison, M. de
Treville being there to claim them. Thus M. de Treville was praised to
the highest note by these men, who adored him, and who, ruffians as they
were, trembled before him like scholars before their master, obedient to
his least word, and ready to sacrifice themselves to wash out the
smallest insult.

M de Treville employed this powerful weapon for the king, in the first
place, and the friends of the king--and then for himself and his own
friends. For the rest, in the memoirs of this period, which has left so
many memoirs, one does not find this worthy gentleman blamed even by his
enemies; and he had many such among men of the pen as well as among men
of the sword. In no instance, let us say, was this worthy gentleman
accused of deriving personal advantage from the cooperation of his
minions. Endowed with a rare genius for intrigue which rendered him the
equal of the ablest intriguers, he remained an honest man. Still
further, in spite of sword thrusts which weaken, and painful exercises
which fatigue, he had become one of the most gallant frequenters of
revels, one of the most insinuating lady’s men, one of the softest
whisperers of interesting nothings of his day; the BONNES FORTUNES of de
Treville were talked of as those of M. de Bassompierre had been talked
of twenty years before, and that was not saying a little. The captain of
the Musketeers was therefore admired, feared, and loved; and this
constitutes the zenith of human fortune.

Louis XIV absorbed all the smaller stars of his court in his own vast
radiance; but his father, a sun PLURIBUS IMPAR, left his personal
splendor to each of his favorites, his individual value to each of his
courtiers. In addition to the leeves of the king and the cardinal, there
might be reckoned in Paris at that time more than two hundred smaller
but still noteworthy leeves. Among these two hundred leeves, that of
Treville was one of the most sought.

The court of his hotel, situated in the Rue du Vieux-Colombier,
resembled a camp from by six o’clock in the morning in summer and eight
o’clock in winter. From fifty to sixty Musketeers, who appeared to
replace one another in order always to present an imposing number,
paraded constantly, armed to the teeth and ready for anything. On one of
those immense staircases, upon whose space modern civilization would
build a whole house, ascended and descended the office seekers of Paris,
who ran after any sort of favor--gentlemen from the provinces anxious to
be enrolled, and servants in all sorts of liveries, bringing and
carrying messages between their masters and M. de Treville. In the
antechamber, upon long circular benches, reposed the elect; that is to
say, those who were called. In this apartment a continued buzzing
prevailed from morning till night, while M. de Treville, in his office
contiguous to this antechamber, received visits, listened to complaints,
gave his orders, and like the king in his balcony at the Louvre, had
only to place himself at the window to review both his men and arms.

The day on which d’Artagnan presented himself the assemblage was
imposing, particularly for a provincial just arriving from his province.
It is true that this provincial was a Gascon; and that, particularly at
this period, the compatriots of d’Artagnan had the reputation of not
being easily intimidated. When he had once passed the massive door
covered with long square-headed nails, he fell into the midst of a troop
of swordsmen, who crossed one another in their passage, calling out,
quarreling, and playing tricks one with another. In order to make one’s
way amid these turbulent and conflicting waves, it was necessary to be
an officer, a great noble, or a pretty woman.

It was, then, into the midst of this tumult and disorder that our young
man advanced with a beating heart, ranging his long rapier up his lanky
leg, and keeping one hand on the edge of his cap, with that half-smile
of the embarrassed provincial who wishes to put on a good face. When he
had passed one group he began to breathe more freely; but he could not
help observing that they turned round to look at him, and for the first
time in his life d’Artagnan, who had till that day entertained a very
good opinion of himself, felt ridiculous.

Arrived at the staircase, it was still worse. There were four Musketeers
on the bottom steps, amusing themselves with the following exercise,
while ten or twelve of their comrades waited upon the landing place to
take their turn in the sport.

One of them, stationed upon the top stair, naked sword in hand,
prevented, or at least endeavored to prevent, the three others from
ascending.

These three others fenced against him with their agile swords.

D’Artagnan at first took these weapons for foils, and believed them to
be buttoned; but he soon perceived by certain scratches that every
weapon was pointed and sharpened, and that at each of these scratches
not only the spectators, but even the actors themselves, laughed like so
many madmen.

He who at the moment occupied the upper step kept his adversaries
marvelously in check. A circle was formed around them. The conditions
required that at every hit the man touched should quit the game,
yielding his turn for the benefit of the adversary who had hit him. In
five minutes three were slightly wounded, one on the hand, another on
the ear, by the defender of the stair, who himself remained intact--a
piece of skill which was worth to him, according to the rules agreed
upon, three turns of favor.

However difficult it might be, or rather as he pretended it was, to
astonish our young traveler, this pastime really astonished him. He had
seen in his province--that land in which heads become so easily
heated--a few of the preliminaries of duels; but the daring of these
four fencers appeared to him the strongest he had ever heard of even in
Gascony. He believed himself transported into that famous country of
giants into which Gulliver afterward went and was so frightened; and yet
he had not gained the goal, for there were still the landing place and
the antechamber.

On the landing they were no longer fighting, but amused themselves with
stories about women, and in the antechamber, with stories about the
court. On the landing d’Artagnan blushed; in the antechamber he
trembled. His warm and fickle imagination, which in Gascony had rendered
him formidable to young chambermaids, and even sometimes their
mistresses, had never dreamed, even in moments of delirium, of half the
amorous wonders or a quarter of the feats of gallantry which were here
set forth in connection with names the best known and with details the
least concealed. But if his morals were shocked on the landing, his
respect for the cardinal was scandalized in the antechamber. There, to
his great astonishment, d’Artagnan heard the policy which made all
Europe tremble criticized aloud and openly, as well as the private life
of the cardinal, which so many great nobles had been punished for trying
to pry into. That great man who was so revered by d’Artagnan the elder
served as an object of ridicule to the Musketeers of Treville, who
cracked their jokes upon his bandy legs and his crooked back. Some sang
ballads about Mme. d’Aguillon, his mistress, and Mme. Cambalet, his
niece; while others formed parties and plans to annoy the pages and
guards of the cardinal duke--all things which appeared to d’Artagnan
monstrous impossibilities.

Nevertheless, when the name of the king was now and then uttered
unthinkingly amid all these cardinal jests, a sort of gag seemed to
close for a moment on all these jeering mouths. They looked hesitatingly
around them, and appeared to doubt the thickness of the partition
between them and the office of M. de Treville; but a fresh allusion soon
brought back the conversation to his Eminence, and then the laughter
recovered its loudness and the light was not withheld from any of his
actions.

“Certes, these fellows will all either be imprisoned or hanged,” thought
the terrified d’Artagnan, “and I, no doubt, with them; for from the
moment I have either listened to or heard them, I shall be held as an
accomplice. What would my good father say, who so strongly pointed out
to me the respect due to the cardinal, if he knew I was in the society
of such pagans?”

We have no need, therefore, to say that d’Artagnan dared not join in the
conversation, only he looked with all his eyes and listened with all his
ears, stretching his five senses so as to lose nothing; and despite his
confidence on the paternal admonitions, he felt himself carried by his
tastes and led by his instincts to praise rather than to blame the
unheard-of things which were taking place.

Although he was a perfect stranger in the court of M. de Treville’s
courtiers, and this his first appearance in that place, he was at length
noticed, and somebody came and asked him what he wanted. At this demand
d’Artagnan gave his name very modestly, emphasized the title of
compatriot, and begged the servant who had put the question to him to
request a moment’s audience of M. de Treville--a request which the
other, with an air of protection, promised to transmit in due season.

D’Artagnan, a little recovered from his first surprise, had now leisure
to study costumes and physiognomy.

The center of the most animated group was a Musketeer of great height
and haughty countenance, dressed in a costume so peculiar as to attract
general attention. He did not wear the uniform cloak--which was not
obligatory at that epoch of less liberty but more independence--but a
cerulean-blue doublet, a little faded and worn, and over this a
magnificent baldric, worked in gold, which shone like water ripples in
the sun. A long cloak of crimson velvet fell in graceful folds from his
shoulders, disclosing in front the splendid baldric, from which was
suspended a gigantic rapier. This Musketeer had just come off guard,
complained of having a cold, and coughed from time to time affectedly.
It was for this reason, as he said to those around him, that he had put
on his cloak; and while he spoke with a lofty air and twisted his
mustache disdainfully, all admired his embroidered baldric, and
d’Artagnan more than anyone.

“What would you have?” said the Musketeer. “This fashion is coming in.
It is a folly, I admit, but still it is the fashion. Besides, one must
lay out one’s inheritance somehow.”

“Ah, Porthos!” cried one of his companions, “don’t try to make us
believe you obtained that baldric by paternal generosity. It was given
to you by that veiled lady I met you with the other Sunday, near the
gate St. Honor.”

“No, upon honor and by the faith of a gentleman, I bought it with the
contents of my own purse,” answered he whom they designated by the name
Porthos.

“Yes; about in the same manner,” said another Musketeer, “that I bought
this new purse with what my mistress put into the old one.”

“It’s true, though,” said Porthos; “and the proof is that I paid twelve
pistoles for it.”

The wonder was increased, though the doubt continued to exist.

“Is it not true, Aramis?” said Porthos, turning toward another
Musketeer.

This other Musketeer formed a perfect contrast to his interrogator, who
had just designated him by the name of Aramis. He was a stout man, of
about two- or three-and-twenty, with an open, ingenuous countenance, a
black, mild eye, and cheeks rosy and downy as an autumn peach. His
delicate mustache marked a perfectly straight line upon his upper lip;
he appeared to dread to lower his hands lest their veins should swell,
and he pinched the tips of his ears from time to time to preserve their
delicate pink transparency. Habitually he spoke little and slowly, bowed
frequently, laughed without noise, showing his teeth, which were fine
and of which, as the rest of his person, he appeared to take great care.
He answered the appeal of his friend by an affirmative nod of the head.

This affirmation appeared to dispel all doubts with regard to the
baldric. They continued to admire it, but said no more about it; and
with a rapid change of thought, the conversation passed suddenly to
another subject.

“What do you think of the story Chalais’s esquire relates?” asked
another Musketeer, without addressing anyone in particular, but on the
contrary speaking to everybody.

“And what does he say?” asked Porthos, in a self-sufficient tone.

“He relates that he met at Brussels Rochefort, the AME DAMNEE of the
cardinal disguised as a Capuchin, and that this cursed Rochefort, thanks
to his disguise, had tricked Monsieur de Laigues, like a ninny as he
is.”

“A ninny, indeed!” said Porthos; “but is the matter certain?”

“I had it from Aramis,” replied the Musketeer.

“Indeed?”

“Why, you knew it, Porthos,” said Aramis. “I told you of it yesterday.
Let us say no more about it.”

“Say no more about it? That’s YOUR opinion!” replied Porthos.

“Say no more about it! PESTE! You come to your conclusions quickly.
What! The cardinal sets a spy upon a gentleman, has his letters stolen
from him by means of a traitor, a brigand, a rascal--has, with the help
of this spy and thanks to this correspondence, Chalais’s throat cut,
under the stupid pretext that he wanted to kill the king and marry
Monsieur to the queen! Nobody knew a word of this enigma. You unraveled
it yesterday to the great satisfaction of all; and while we are still
gaping with wonder at the news, you come and tell us today, ‘Let us say
no more about it.’”

“Well, then, let us talk about it, since you desire it,” replied Aramis,
patiently.

“This Rochefort,” cried Porthos, “if I were the esquire of poor Chalais,
should pass a minute or two very uncomfortably with me.”

“And you--you would pass rather a sad quarter-hour with the Red Duke,”
replied Aramis.

“Oh, the Red Duke! Bravo! Bravo! The Red Duke!” cried Porthos, clapping
his hands and nodding his head. “The Red Duke is capital. I’ll circulate
that saying, be assured, my dear fellow. Who says this Aramis is not a
wit? What a misfortune it is you did not follow your first vocation;
what a delicious abbe you would have made!”

“Oh, it’s only a temporary postponement,” replied Aramis; “I shall be
one someday. You very well know, Porthos, that I continue to study
theology for that purpose.”

“He will be one, as he says,” cried Porthos; “he will be one, sooner or
later.”

“Sooner,” said Aramis.

“He only waits for one thing to determine him to resume his cassock,
which hangs behind his uniform,” said another Musketeer.

“What is he waiting for?” asked another.

“Only till the queen has given an heir to the crown of France.”

“No jesting upon that subject, gentlemen,” said Porthos; “thank God the
queen is still of an age to give one!”

“They say that Monsieur de Buckingham is in France,” replied Aramis,
with a significant smile which gave to this sentence, apparently so
simple, a tolerably scandalous meaning.

“Aramis, my good friend, this time you are wrong,” interrupted Porthos.
“Your wit is always leading you beyond bounds; if Monsieur de Treville
heard you, you would repent of speaking thus.”

“Are you going to give me a lesson, Porthos?” cried Aramis, from whose
usually mild eye a flash passed like lightning.

“My dear fellow, be a Musketeer or an abbe. Be one or the other, but not
both,” replied Porthos. “You know what Athos told you the other day; you
eat at everybody’s mess. Ah, don’t be angry, I beg of you, that would be
useless; you know what is agreed upon between you, Athos and me. You go
to Madame d’Aguillon’s, and you pay your court to her; you go to Madame
de Bois-Tracy’s, the cousin of Madame de Chevreuse, and you pass for
being far advanced in the good graces of that lady. Oh, good Lord! Don’t
trouble yourself to reveal your good luck; no one asks for your
secret-all the world knows your discretion. But since you possess that
virtue, why the devil don’t you make use of it with respect to her
Majesty? Let whoever likes talk of the king and the cardinal, and how he
likes; but the queen is sacred, and if anyone speaks of her, let it be
respectfully.”

“Porthos, you are as vain as Narcissus; I plainly tell you so,” replied
Aramis. “You know I hate moralizing, except when it is done by Athos. As
to you, good sir, you wear too magnificent a baldric to be strong on
that head. I will be an abbe if it suits me. In the meanwhile I am a
Musketeer; in that quality I say what I please, and at this moment it
pleases me to say that you weary me.”

“Aramis!”

“Porthos!”

“Gentlemen! Gentlemen!” cried the surrounding group.

“Monsieur de Treville awaits Monsieur d’Artagnan,” cried a servant,
throwing open the door of the cabinet.

At this announcement, during which the door remained open, everyone
became mute, and amid the general silence the young man crossed part of
the length of the antechamber, and entered the apartment of the captain
of the Musketeers, congratulating himself with all his heart at having
so narrowly escaped the end of this strange quarrel.




3 THE AUDIENCE


M de Treville was at the moment in rather ill-humor, nevertheless he
saluted the young man politely, who bowed to the very ground; and he
smiled on receiving d’Artagnan’s response, the Bearnese accent of which
recalled to him at the same time his youth and his country--a double
remembrance which makes a man smile at all ages; but stepping toward the
antechamber and making a sign to d’Artagnan with his hand, as if to ask
his permission to finish with others before he began with him, he called
three times, with a louder voice at each time, so that he ran through
the intervening tones between the imperative accent and the angry
accent.

“Athos! Porthos! Aramis!”

The two Musketeers with whom we have already made acquaintance, and who
answered to the last of these three names, immediately quitted the group
of which they had formed a part, and advanced toward the cabinet, the
door of which closed after them as soon as they had entered. Their
appearance, although it was not quite at ease, excited by its
carelessness, at once full of dignity and submission, the admiration of
d’Artagnan, who beheld in these two men demigods, and in their leader an
Olympian Jupiter, armed with all his thunders.

When the two Musketeers had entered; when the door was closed behind
them; when the buzzing murmur of the antechamber, to which the summons
which had been made had doubtless furnished fresh food, had recommenced;
when M. de Treville had three or four times paced in silence, and with a
frowning brow, the whole length of his cabinet, passing each time before
Porthos and Aramis, who were as upright and silent as if on parade--he
stopped all at once full in front of them, and covering them from head
to foot with an angry look, “Do you know what the king said to me,”
cried he, “and that no longer ago than yesterday evening--do you know,
gentlemen?”

“No,” replied the two Musketeers, after a moment’s silence, “no, sir, we
do not.”

“But I hope that you will do us the honor to tell us,” added Aramis, in
his politest tone and with his most graceful bow.

“He told me that he should henceforth recruit his Musketeers from among
the Guards of Monsieur the Cardinal.”

“The Guards of the cardinal! And why so?” asked Porthos, warmly.

“Because he plainly perceives that his piquette* stands in need of being
enlivened by a mixture of good wine.”

    _*A watered liquor, made from the second pressing of the grape._

The two Musketeers reddened to the whites of their eyes. D’Artagnan did
not know where he was, and wished himself a hundred feet underground.

“Yes, yes,” continued M. de Treville, growing warmer as he spoke, “and
his majesty was right; for, upon my honor, it is true that the
Musketeers make but a miserable figure at court. The cardinal related
yesterday while playing with the king, with an air of condolence very
displeasing to me, that the day before yesterday those DAMNED
MUSKETEERS, those DAREDEVILS--he dwelt upon those words with an ironical
tone still more displeasing to me--those BRAGGARTS, added he, glancing
at me with his tiger-cat’s eye, had made a riot in the Rue Ferou in a
cabaret, and that a party of his Guards (I thought he was going to laugh
in my face) had been forced to arrest the rioters! MORBLEU! You must
know something about it. Arrest Musketeers! You were among them--you
were! Don’t deny it; you were recognized, and the cardinal named you.
But it’s all my fault; yes, it’s all my fault, because it is myself who
selects my men. You, Aramis, why the devil did you ask me for a uniform
when you would have been so much better in a cassock? And you, Porthos,
do you only wear such a fine golden baldric to suspend a sword of straw
from it? And Athos--I don’t see Athos. Where is he?”

“Ill--”

“Very ill, say you? And of what malady?”

“It is feared that it may be the smallpox, sir,” replied Porthos,
desirous of taking his turn in the conversation; “and what is serious is
that it will certainly spoil his face.”

“The smallpox! That’s a great story to tell me, Porthos! Sick of the
smallpox at his age! No, no; but wounded without doubt, killed, perhaps.
Ah, if I knew! S’blood! Messieurs Musketeers, I will not have this
haunting of bad places, this quarreling in the streets, this swordplay
at the crossways; and above all, I will not have occasion given for the
cardinal’s Guards, who are brave, quiet, skillful men who never put
themselves in a position to be arrested, and who, besides, never allow
themselves to be arrested, to laugh at you! I am sure of it--they would
prefer dying on the spot to being arrested or taking back a step. To
save yourselves, to scamper away, to flee--that is good for the king’s
Musketeers!”

Porthos and Aramis trembled with rage. They could willingly have
strangled M. de Treville, if, at the bottom of all this, they had not
felt it was the great love he bore them which made him speak thus. They
stamped upon the carpet with their feet; they bit their lips till the
blood came, and grasped the hilts of their swords with all their might.
All without had heard, as we have said, Athos, Porthos, and Aramis
called, and had guessed, from M. de Treville’s tone of voice, that he
was very angry about something. Ten curious heads were glued to the
tapestry and became pale with fury; for their ears, closely applied to
the door, did not lose a syllable of what he said, while their mouths
repeated as he went on, the insulting expressions of the captain to all
the people in the antechamber. In an instant, from the door of the
cabinet to the street gate, the whole hotel was boiling.

“Ah! The king’s Musketeers are arrested by the Guards of the cardinal,
are they?” continued M. de Treville, as furious at heart as his
soldiers, but emphasizing his words and plunging them, one by one, so to
say, like so many blows of a stiletto, into the bosoms of his auditors.
“What! Six of his Eminence’s Guards arrest six of his Majesty’s
Musketeers! MORBLEU! My part is taken! I will go straight to the louvre;
I will give in my resignation as captain of the king’s Musketeers to
take a lieutenancy in the cardinal’s Guards, and if he refuses me,
MORBLEU! I will turn abbe.”

At these words, the murmur without became an explosion; nothing was to
be heard but oaths and blasphemies. The MORBLEUS, the SANG DIEUS, the
MORTS TOUTS LES DIABLES, crossed one another in the air. D’Artagnan
looked for some tapestry behind which he might hide himself, and felt an
immense inclination to crawl under the table.

“Well, my Captain,” said Porthos, quite beside himself, “the truth is
that we were six against six. But we were not captured by fair means;
and before we had time to draw our swords, two of our party were dead,
and Athos, grievously wounded, was very little better. For you know
Athos. Well, Captain, he endeavored twice to get up, and fell again
twice. And we did not surrender--no! They dragged us away by force. On
the way we escaped. As for Athos, they believed him to be dead, and left
him very quiet on the field of battle, not thinking it worth the trouble
to carry him away. That’s the whole story. What the devil, Captain, one
cannot win all one’s battles! The great Pompey lost that of Pharsalia;
and Francis the First, who was, as I have heard say, as good as other
folks, nevertheless lost the Battle of Pavia.”

“And I have the honor of assuring you that I killed one of them with his
own sword,” said Aramis; “for mine was broken at the first parry. Killed
him, or poniarded him, sir, as is most agreeable to you.”

“I did not know that,” replied M. de Treville, in a somewhat softened
tone. “The cardinal exaggerated, as I perceive.”

“But pray, sir,” continued Aramis, who, seeing his captain become
appeased, ventured to risk a prayer, “do not say that Athos is wounded.
He would be in despair if that should come to the ears of the king; and
as the wound is very serious, seeing that after crossing the shoulder it
penetrates into the chest, it is to be feared--”

At this instant the tapestry was raised and a noble and handsome head,
but frightfully pale, appeared under the fringe.

“Athos!” cried the two Musketeers.

“Athos!” repeated M. de Treville himself.

“You have sent for me, sir,” said Athos to M. de Treville, in a feeble
yet perfectly calm voice, “you have sent for me, as my comrades inform
me, and I have hastened to receive your orders. I am here; what do you
want with me?”

And at these words, the Musketeer, in irreproachable costume, belted as
usual, with a tolerably firm step, entered the cabinet. M. de Treville,
moved to the bottom of his heart by this proof of courage, sprang toward
him.

“I was about to say to these gentlemen,” added he, “that I forbid my
Musketeers to expose their lives needlessly; for brave men are very dear
to the king, and the king knows that his Musketeers are the bravest on
the earth. Your hand, Athos!”

And without waiting for the answer of the newcomer to this proof of
affection, M. de Treville seized his right hand and pressed it with all
his might, without perceiving that Athos, whatever might be his
self-command, allowed a slight murmur of pain to escape him, and if
possible, grew paler than he was before.

The door had remained open, so strong was the excitement produced by the
arrival of Athos, whose wound, though kept as a secret, was known to
all. A burst of satisfaction hailed the last words of the captain; and
two or three heads, carried away by the enthusiasm of the moment,
appeared through the openings of the tapestry. M. de Treville was about
to reprehend this breach of the rules of etiquette, when he felt the
hand of Athos, who had rallied all his energies to contend against pain,
at length overcome by it, fell upon the floor as if he were dead.

“A surgeon!” cried M. de Treville, “mine! The king’s! The best! A
surgeon! Or, s’blood, my brave Athos will die!”

At the cries of M. de Treville, the whole assemblage rushed into the
cabinet, he not thinking to shut the door against anyone, and all
crowded round the wounded man. But all this eager attention might have
been useless if the doctor so loudly called for had not chanced to be in
the hotel. He pushed through the crowd, approached Athos, still
insensible, and as all this noise and commotion inconvenienced him
greatly, he required, as the first and most urgent thing, that the
Musketeer should be carried into an adjoining chamber. Immediately M. de
Treville opened and pointed the way to Porthos and Aramis, who bore
their comrade in their arms. Behind this group walked the surgeon; and
behind the surgeon the door closed.

The cabinet of M. de Treville, generally held so sacred, became in an
instant the annex of the antechamber. Everyone spoke, harangued, and
vociferated, swearing, cursing, and consigning the cardinal and his
Guards to all the devils.

An instant after, Porthos and Aramis re-entered, the surgeon and M. de
Treville alone remaining with the wounded.

At length, M. de Treville himself returned. The injured man had
recovered his senses. The surgeon declared that the situation of the
Musketeer had nothing in it to render his friends uneasy, his weakness
having been purely and simply caused by loss of blood.

Then M. de Treville made a sign with his hand, and all retired except
d’Artagnan, who did not forget that he had an audience, and with the
tenacity of a Gascon remained in his place.

When all had gone out and the door was closed, M. de Treville, on
turning round, found himself alone with the young man. The event which
had occurred had in some degree broken the thread of his ideas. He
inquired what was the will of his persevering visitor. D’Artagnan then
repeated his name, and in an instant recovering all his remembrances of
the present and the past, M. de Treville grasped the situation.

“Pardon me,” said he, smiling, “pardon me my dear compatriot, but I had
wholly forgotten you. But what help is there for it! A captain is
nothing but a father of a family, charged with even a greater
responsibility than the father of an ordinary family. Soldiers are big
children; but as I maintain that the orders of the king, and more
particularly the orders of the cardinal, should be executed--”

D’Artagnan could not restrain a smile. By this smile M. de Treville
judged that he had not to deal with a fool, and changing the
conversation, came straight to the point.

“I respected your father very much,” said he. “What can I do for the
son? Tell me quickly; my time is not my own.”

“Monsieur,” said d’Artagnan, “on quitting Tarbes and coming hither, it
was my intention to request of you, in remembrance of the friendship
which you have not forgotten, the uniform of a Musketeer; but after all
that I have seen during the last two hours, I comprehend that such a
favor is enormous, and tremble lest I should not merit it.”

“It is indeed a favor, young man,” replied M. de Treville, “but it may
not be so far beyond your hopes as you believe, or rather as you appear
to believe. But his majesty’s decision is always necessary; and I inform
you with regret that no one becomes a Musketeer without the preliminary
ordeal of several campaigns, certain brilliant actions, or a service of
two years in some other regiment less favored than ours.”

D’Artagnan bowed without replying, feeling his desire to don the
Musketeer’s uniform vastly increased by the great difficulties which
preceded the attainment of it.

“But,” continued M. de Treville, fixing upon his compatriot a look so
piercing that it might be said he wished to read the thoughts of his
heart, “on account of my old companion, your father, as I have said, I
will do something for you, young man. Our recruits from Bearn are not
generally very rich, and I have no reason to think matters have much
changed in this respect since I left the province. I dare say you have
not brought too large a stock of money with you?”

D’Artagnan drew himself up with a proud air which plainly said, “I ask
alms of no man.”

“Oh, that’s very well, young man,” continued M. de Treville, “that’s all
very well. I know these airs; I myself came to Paris with four crowns in
my purse, and would have fought with anyone who dared to tell me I was
not in a condition to purchase the Louvre.”

D’Artagnan’s bearing became still more imposing. Thanks to the sale of
his horse, he commenced his career with four more crowns than M. de
Treville possessed at the commencement of his.

“You ought, I say, then, to husband the means you have, however large
the sum may be; but you ought also to endeavor to perfect yourself in
the exercises becoming a gentleman. I will write a letter today to the
Director of the Royal Academy, and tomorrow he will admit you without
any expense to yourself. Do not refuse this little service. Our
best-born and richest gentlemen sometimes solicit it without being able
to obtain it. You will learn horsemanship, swordsmanship in all its
branches, and dancing. You will make some desirable acquaintances; and
from time to time you can call upon me, just to tell me how you are
getting on, and to say whether I can be of further service to you.”

D’Artagnan, stranger as he was to all the manners of a court, could not
but perceive a little coldness in this reception.

“Alas, sir,” said he, “I cannot but perceive how sadly I miss the letter
of introduction which my father gave me to present to you.”

“I certainly am surprised,” replied M. de Treville, “that you should
undertake so long a journey without that necessary passport, the sole
resource of us poor Bearnese.”

“I had one, sir, and, thank God, such as I could wish,” cried
d’Artagnan; “but it was perfidiously stolen from me.”

He then related the adventure of Meung, described the unknown gentleman
with the greatest minuteness, and all with a warmth and truthfulness
that delighted M. de Treville.

“This is all very strange,” said M. de Treville, after meditating a
minute; “you mentioned my name, then, aloud?”

“Yes, sir, I certainly committed that imprudence; but why should I have
done otherwise? A name like yours must be as a buckler to me on my way.
Judge if I should not put myself under its protection.”

Flattery was at that period very current, and M. de Treville loved
incense as well as a king, or even a cardinal. He could not refrain from
a smile of visible satisfaction; but this smile soon disappeared, and
returning to the adventure of Meung, “Tell me,” continued he, “had not
this gentlemen a slight scar on his cheek?”

“Yes, such a one as would be made by the grazing of a ball.”

“Was he not a fine-looking man?”

“Yes.”

“Of lofty stature.”

“Yes.”

“Of pale complexion and brown hair?”

“Yes, yes, that is he; how is it, sir, that you are acquainted with this
man? If I ever find him again--and I will find him, I swear, were it in
hell!”

“He was waiting for a woman,” continued Treville.

“He departed immediately after having conversed for a minute with her
whom he awaited.”

“You know not the subject of their conversation?”

“He gave her a box, told her not to open it except in London.”

“Was this woman English?”

“He called her Milady.”

“It is he; it must be he!” murmured Treville. “I believed him still at
Brussels.”

“Oh, sir, if you know who this man is,” cried d’Artagnan, “tell me who
he is, and whence he is. I will then release you from all your
promises--even that of procuring my admission into the Musketeers; for
before everything, I wish to avenge myself.”

“Beware, young man!” cried Treville. “If you see him coming on one side
of the street, pass by on the other. Do not cast yourself against such a
rock; he would break you like glass.”

“That will not prevent me,” replied d’Artagnan, “if ever I find him.”

“In the meantime,” said Treville, “seek him not--if I have a right to
advise you.”

All at once the captain stopped, as if struck by a sudden suspicion.
This great hatred which the young traveler manifested so loudly for this
man, who--a rather improbable thing--had stolen his father’s letter from
him--was there not some perfidy concealed under this hatred? Might not
this young man be sent by his Eminence? Might he not have come for the
purpose of laying a snare for him? This pretended d’Artagnan--was he not
an emissary of the cardinal, whom the cardinal sought to introduce into
Treville’s house, to place near him, to win his confidence, and
afterward to ruin him as had been done in a thousand other instances? He
fixed his eyes upon d’Artagnan even more earnestly than before. He was
moderately reassured, however, by the aspect of that countenance, full
of astute intelligence and affected humility. “I know he is a Gascon,”
reflected he, “but he may be one for the cardinal as well as for me. Let
us try him.”

“My friend,” said he, slowly, “I wish, as the son of an ancient
friend--for I consider this story of the lost letter perfectly true--I
wish, I say, in order to repair the coldness you may have remarked in my
reception of you, to discover to you the secrets of our policy. The king
and the cardinal are the best of friends; their apparent bickerings are
only feints to deceive fools. I am not willing that a compatriot, a
handsome cavalier, a brave youth, quite fit to make his way, should
become the dupe of all these artifices and fall into the snare after the
example of so many others who have been ruined by it. Be assured that I
am devoted to both these all-powerful masters, and that my earnest
endeavors have no other aim than the service of the king, and also the
cardinal--one of the most illustrious geniuses that France has ever
produced.

“Now, young man, regulate your conduct accordingly; and if you
entertain, whether from your family, your relations, or even from your
instincts, any of these enmities which we see constantly breaking out
against the cardinal, bid me adieu and let us separate. I will aid you
in many ways, but without attaching you to my person. I hope that my
frankness at least will make you my friend; for you are the only young
man to whom I have hitherto spoken as I have done to you.”

Treville said to himself: “If the cardinal has set this young fox upon
me, he will certainly not have failed--he, who knows how bitterly I
execrate him--to tell his spy that the best means of making his court to
me is to rail at him. Therefore, in spite of all my protestations, if it
be as I suspect, my cunning gossip will assure me that he holds his
Eminence in horror.”

It, however, proved otherwise. D’Artagnan answered, with the greatest
simplicity: “I came to Paris with exactly such intentions. My father
advised me to stoop to nobody but the king, the cardinal, and
yourself--whom he considered the first three personages in France.”

D’Artagnan added M. de Treville to the others, as may be perceived; but
he thought this addition would do no harm.

“I have the greatest veneration for the cardinal,” continued he, “and
the most profound respect for his actions. So much the better for me,
sir, if you speak to me, as you say, with frankness--for then you will
do me the honor to esteem the resemblance of our opinions; but if you
have entertained any doubt, as naturally you may, I feel that I am
ruining myself by speaking the truth. But I still trust you will not
esteem me the less for it, and that is my object beyond all others.”

M de Treville was surprised to the greatest degree. So much penetration,
so much frankness, created admiration, but did not entirely remove his
suspicions. The more this young man was superior to others, the more he
was to be dreaded if he meant to deceive him. Nevertheless, he pressed
d’Artagnan’s hand, and said to him: “You are an honest youth; but at the
present moment I can only do for you that which I just now offered. My
hotel will be always open to you. Hereafter, being able to ask for me at
all hours, and consequently to take advantage of all opportunities, you
will probably obtain that which you desire.”

“That is to say,” replied d’Artagnan, “that you will wait until I have
proved myself worthy of it. Well, be assured,” added he, with the
familiarity of a Gascon, “you shall not wait long.” And he bowed in
order to retire, and as if he considered the future in his own hands.

“But wait a minute,” said M. de Treville, stopping him. “I promised you
a letter for the director of the Academy. Are you too proud to accept
it, young gentleman?”

“No, sir,” said d’Artagnan; “and I will guard it so carefully that I
will be sworn it shall arrive at its address, and woe be to him who
shall attempt to take it from me!”

M de Treville smiled at this flourish; and leaving his young man
compatriot in the embrasure of the window, where they had talked
together, he seated himself at a table in order to write the promised
letter of recommendation. While he was doing this, d’Artagnan, having no
better employment, amused himself with beating a march upon the window
and with looking at the Musketeers, who went away, one after another,
following them with his eyes until they disappeared.

M de Treville, after having written the letter, sealed it, and rising,
approached the young man in order to give it to him. But at the very
moment when d’Artagnan stretched out his hand to receive it, M. de
Treville was highly astonished to see his protege make a sudden spring,
become crimson with passion, and rush from the cabinet crying, “S’blood,
he shall not escape me this time!”

“And who?” asked M. de Treville.

“He, my thief!” replied d’Artagnan. “Ah, the traitor!” and he
disappeared.

“The devil take the madman!” murmured M. de Treville, “unless,” added
he, “this is a cunning mode of escaping, seeing that he had failed in
his purpose!”




4 THE SHOULDER OF ATHOS, THE BALDRIC OF PORTHOS AND THE HANDKERCHIEF OF
ARAMIS


D’Artagnan, in a state of fury, crossed the antechamber at three bounds,
and was darting toward the stairs, which he reckoned upon descending
four at a time, when, in his heedless course, he ran head foremost
against a Musketeer who was coming out of one of M. de Treville’s
private rooms, and striking his shoulder violently, made him utter a
cry, or rather a howl.

“Excuse me,” said d’Artagnan, endeavoring to resume his course, “excuse
me, but I am in a hurry.”

Scarcely had he descended the first stair, when a hand of iron seized
him by the belt and stopped him.

“You are in a hurry?” said the Musketeer, as pale as a sheet. “Under
that pretense you run against me! You say, ‘Excuse me,’ and you believe
that is sufficient? Not at all, my young man. Do you fancy because you
have heard Monsieur de Treville speak to us a little cavalierly today
that other people are to treat us as he speaks to us? Undeceive
yourself, comrade, you are not Monsieur de Treville.”

“My faith!” replied d’Artagnan, recognizing Athos, who, after the
dressing performed by the doctor, was returning to his own apartment. “I
did not do it intentionally, and not doing it intentionally, I said
‘Excuse me.’ It appears to me that this is quite enough. I repeat to
you, however, and this time on my word of honor--I think perhaps too
often--that I am in haste, great haste. Leave your hold, then, I beg of
you, and let me go where my business calls me.”

“Monsieur,” said Athos, letting him go, “you are not polite; it is easy
to perceive that you come from a distance.”

D’Artagnan had already strode down three or four stairs, but at Athos’s
last remark he stopped short.

“MORBLEU, monsieur!” said he, “however far I may come, it is not you who
can give me a lesson in good manners, I warn you.”

“Perhaps,” said Athos.

“Ah! If I were not in such haste, and if I were not running after
someone,” said d’Artagnan.

“Monsieur Man-in-a-hurry, you can find me without running--ME, you
understand?”

“And where, I pray you?”

“Near the Carmes-Deschaux.”

“At what hour?”

“About noon.”

“About noon? That will do; I will be there.”

“Endeavor not to make me wait; for at quarter past twelve I will cut off
your ears as you run.”

“Good!” cried d’Artagnan, “I will be there ten minutes before twelve.”
And he set off running as if the devil possessed him, hoping that he
might yet find the stranger, whose slow pace could not have carried him
far.

But at the street gate, Porthos was talking with the soldier on guard.
Between the two talkers there was just enough room for a man to pass.
D’Artagnan thought it would suffice for him, and he sprang forward like
a dart between them. But d’Artagnan had reckoned without the wind. As he
was about to pass, the wind blew out Porthos’s long cloak, and
d’Artagnan rushed straight into the middle of it. Without doubt, Porthos
had reasons for not abandoning this part of his vestments, for instead
of quitting his hold on the flap in his hand, he pulled it toward him,
so that d’Artagnan rolled himself up in the velvet by a movement of
rotation explained by the persistency of Porthos.

D’Artagnan, hearing the Musketeer swear, wished to escape from the
cloak, which blinded him, and sought to find his way from under the
folds of it. He was particularly anxious to avoid marring the freshness
of the magnificent baldric we are acquainted with; but on timidly
opening his eyes, he found himself with his nose fixed between the two
shoulders of Porthos--that is to say, exactly upon the baldric.

Alas, like most things in this world which have nothing in their favor
but appearances, the baldric was glittering with gold in the front, but
was nothing but simple buff behind. Vainglorious as he was, Porthos
could not afford to have a baldric wholly of gold, but had at least
half. One could comprehend the necessity of the cold and the urgency of
the cloak.

“Bless me!” cried Porthos, making strong efforts to disembarrass himself
of d’Artagnan, who was wriggling about his back; “you must be mad to run
against people in this manner.”

“Excuse me,” said d’Artagnan, reappearing under the shoulder of the
giant, “but I am in such haste--I was running after someone and--”

“And do you always forget your eyes when you run?” asked Porthos.

“No,” replied d’Artagnan, piqued, “and thanks to my eyes, I can see what
other people cannot see.”

Whether Porthos understood him or did not understand him, giving way to
his anger, “Monsieur,” said he, “you stand a chance of getting chastised
if you rub Musketeers in this fashion.”

“Chastised, Monsieur!” said d’Artagnan, “the expression is strong.”

“It is one that becomes a man accustomed to look his enemies in the
face.”

“Ah, PARDIEU! I know full well that you don’t turn your back to yours.”

And the young man, delighted with his joke, went away laughing loudly.

Porthos foamed with rage, and made a movement to rush after d’Artagnan.

“Presently, presently,” cried the latter, “when you haven’t your cloak
on.”

“At one o’clock, then, behind the Luxembourg.”

“Very well, at one o’clock, then,” replied d’Artagnan, turning the angle
of the street.

But neither in the street he had passed through, nor in the one which
his eager glance pervaded, could he see anyone; however slowly the
stranger had walked, he was gone on his way, or perhaps had entered some
house. D’Artagnan inquired of everyone he met with, went down to the
ferry, came up again by the Rue de Seine, and the Red Cross; but
nothing, absolutely nothing! This chase was, however, advantageous to
him in one sense, for in proportion as the perspiration broke from his
forehead, his heart began to cool.

He began to reflect upon the events that had passed; they were numerous
and inauspicious. It was scarcely eleven o’clock in the morning, and yet
this morning had already brought him into disgrace with M. de Treville,
who could not fail to think the manner in which d’Artagnan had left him
a little cavalier.

Besides this, he had drawn upon himself two good duels with two men,
each capable of killing three d’Artagnans--with two Musketeers, in
short, with two of those beings whom he esteemed so greatly that he
placed them in his mind and heart above all other men.

The outlook was sad. Sure of being killed by Athos, it may easily be
understood that the young man was not very uneasy about Porthos. As
hope, however, is the last thing extinguished in the heart of man, he
finished by hoping that he might survive, even though with terrible
wounds, in both these duels; and in case of surviving, he made the
following reprehensions upon his own conduct:

“What a madcap I was, and what a stupid fellow I am! That brave and
unfortunate Athos was wounded on that very shoulder against which I must
run head foremost, like a ram. The only thing that astonishes me is that
he did not strike me dead at once. He had good cause to do so; the pain
I gave him must have been atrocious. As to Porthos--oh, as to Porthos,
faith, that’s a droll affair!”

And in spite of himself, the young man began to laugh aloud, looking
round carefully, however, to see that his solitary laugh, without a
cause in the eyes of passers-by, offended no one.

“As to Porthos, that is certainly droll; but I am not the less a giddy
fool. Are people to be run against without warning? No! And have I any
right to go and peep under their cloaks to see what is not there? He
would have pardoned me, he would certainly have pardoned me, if I had
not said anything to him about that cursed baldric--in ambiguous words,
it is true, but rather drolly ambiguous. Ah, cursed Gascon that I am, I
get from one hobble into another. Friend d’Artagnan,” continued he,
speaking to himself with all the amenity that he thought due himself,
“if you escape, of which there is not much chance, I would advise you to
practice perfect politeness for the future. You must henceforth be
admired and quoted as a model of it. To be obliging and polite does not
necessarily make a man a coward. Look at Aramis, now; Aramis is mildness
and grace personified. Well, did anybody ever dream of calling Aramis a
coward? No, certainly not, and from this moment I will endeavor to model
myself after him. Ah! That’s strange! Here he is!”

D’Artagnan, walking and soliloquizing, had arrived within a few steps of
the hotel d’Arguillon and in front of that hotel perceived Aramis,
chatting gaily with three gentlemen; but as he had not forgotten that it
was in presence of this young man that M. de Treville had been so angry
in the morning, and as a witness of the rebuke the Musketeers had
received was not likely to be at all agreeable, he pretended not to see
him. D’Artagnan, on the contrary, quite full of his plans of
conciliation and courtesy, approached the young men with a profound bow,
accompanied by a most gracious smile. All four, besides, immediately
broke off their conversation.

D’Artagnan was not so dull as not to perceive that he was one too many;
but he was not sufficiently broken into the fashions of the gay world to
know how to extricate himself gallantly from a false position, like that
of a man who begins to mingle with people he is scarcely acquainted with
and in a conversation that does not concern him. He was seeking in his
mind, then, for the least awkward means of retreat, when he remarked
that Aramis had let his handkerchief fall, and by mistake, no doubt, had
placed his foot upon it. This appeared to be a favorable opportunity to
repair his intrusion. He stooped, and with the most gracious air he
could assume, drew the handkerchief from under the foot of the Musketeer
in spite of the efforts the latter made to detain it, and holding it out
to him, said, “I believe, monsieur, that this is a handkerchief you
would be sorry to lose?”

The handkerchief was indeed richly embroidered, and had a coronet and
arms at one of its corners. Aramis blushed excessively, and snatched
rather than took the handkerchief from the hand of the Gascon.

“Ah, ah!” cried one of the Guards, “will you persist in saying, most
discreet Aramis, that you are not on good terms with Madame de
Bois-Tracy, when that gracious lady has the kindness to lend you one of
her handkerchiefs?”

Aramis darted at d’Artagnan one of those looks which inform a man that
he has acquired a mortal enemy. Then, resuming his mild air, “You are
deceived, gentlemen,” said he, “this handkerchief is not mine, and I
cannot fancy why Monsieur has taken it into his head to offer it to me
rather than to one of you; and as a proof of what I say, here is mine in
my pocket.”

So saying, he pulled out his own handkerchief, likewise a very elegant
handkerchief, and of fine cambric--though cambric was dear at the
period--but a handkerchief without embroidery and without arms, only
ornamented with a single cipher, that of its proprietor.

This time d’Artagnan was not hasty. He perceived his mistake; but the
friends of Aramis were not at all convinced by his denial, and one of
them addressed the young Musketeer with affected seriousness. “If it
were as you pretend it is,” said he, “I should be forced, my dear
Aramis, to reclaim it myself; for, as you very well know, Bois-Tracy is
an intimate friend of mine, and I cannot allow the property of his wife
to be sported as a trophy.”

“You make the demand badly,” replied Aramis; “and while acknowledging
the justice of your reclamation, I refuse it on account of the form.”

“The fact is,” hazarded d’Artagnan, timidly, “I did not see the
handkerchief fall from the pocket of Monsieur Aramis. He had his foot
upon it, that is all; and I thought from having his foot upon it the
handkerchief was his.”

“And you were deceived, my dear sir,” replied Aramis, coldly, very
little sensible to the reparation. Then turning toward that one of the
guards who had declared himself the friend of Bois-Tracy, “Besides,”
continued he, “I have reflected, my dear intimate of Bois-Tracy, that I
am not less tenderly his friend than you can possibly be; so that
decidedly this handkerchief is as likely to have fallen from your pocket
as mine.”

“No, upon my honor!” cried his Majesty’s Guardsman.

“You are about to swear upon your honor and I upon my word, and then it
will be pretty evident that one of us will have lied. Now, here,
Montaran, we will do better than that--let each take a half.”

“Of the handkerchief?”

“Yes.”

“Perfectly just,” cried the other two Guardsmen, “the judgment of King
Solomon! Aramis, you certainly are full of wisdom!”

The young men burst into a laugh, and as may be supposed, the affair had
no other sequel. In a moment or two the conversation ceased, and the
three Guardsmen and the Musketeer, after having cordially shaken hands,
separated, the Guardsmen going one way and Aramis another.

“Now is my time to make peace with this gallant man,” said d’Artagnan to
himself, having stood on one side during the whole of the latter part of
the conversation; and with this good feeling drawing near to Aramis, who
was departing without paying any attention to him, “Monsieur,” said he,
“you will excuse me, I hope.”

“Ah, monsieur,” interrupted Aramis, “permit me to observe to you that
you have not acted in this affair as a gallant man ought.”

“What, monsieur!” cried d’Artagnan, “and do you suppose--”

“I suppose, monsieur, that you are not a fool, and that you knew very
well, although coming from Gascony, that people do not tread upon
handkerchiefs without a reason. What the devil! Paris is not paved with
cambric!”

“Monsieur, you act wrongly in endeavoring to mortify me,” said
d’Artagnan, in whom the natural quarrelsome spirit began to speak more
loudly than his pacific resolutions. “I am from Gascony, it is true; and
since you know it, there is no occasion to tell you that Gascons are not
very patient, so that when they have begged to be excused once, were it
even for a folly, they are convinced that they have done already at
least as much again as they ought to have done.”

“Monsieur, what I say to you about the matter,” said Aramis, “is not for
the sake of seeking a quarrel. Thank God, I am not a bravo! And being a
Musketeer but for a time, I only fight when I am forced to do so, and
always with great repugnance; but this time the affair is serious, for
here is a lady compromised by you.”

“By US, you mean!” cried d’Artagnan.

“Why did you so maladroitly restore me the handkerchief?”

“Why did you so awkwardly let it fall?”

“I have said, monsieur, and I repeat, that the handkerchief did not fall
from my pocket.”

“And thereby you have lied twice, monsieur, for I saw it fall.”

“Ah, you take it with that tone, do you, Master Gascon? Well, I will
teach you how to behave yourself.”

“And I will send you back to your Mass book, Master Abbe. Draw, if you
please, and instantly--”

“Not so, if you please, my good friend--not here, at least. Do you not
perceive that we are opposite the Hotel d’Arguillon, which is full of
the cardinal’s creatures? How do I know that this is not his Eminence
who has honored you with the commission to procure my head? Now, I
entertain a ridiculous partiality for my head, it seems to suit my
shoulders so correctly. I wish to kill you, be at rest as to that, but
to kill you quietly in a snug, remote place, where you will not be able
to boast of your death to anybody.”

“I agree, monsieur; but do not be too confident. Take your handkerchief;
whether it belongs to you or another, you may perhaps stand in need of
it.”

“Monsieur is a Gascon?” asked Aramis.

“Yes. Monsieur does not postpone an interview through prudence?”

“Prudence, monsieur, is a virtue sufficiently useless to Musketeers, I
know, but indispensable to churchmen; and as I am only a Musketeer
provisionally, I hold it good to be prudent. At two o’clock I shall have
the honor of expecting you at the hotel of Monsieur de Treville. There I
will indicate to you the best place and time.”

The two young men bowed and separated, Aramis ascending the street which
led to the Luxembourg, while d’Artagnan, perceiving the appointed hour
was approaching, took the road to the Carmes-Deschaux, saying to
himself, “Decidedly I can’t draw back; but at least, if I am killed, I
shall be killed by a Musketeer.”




5 THE KING’S MUSKETEERS AND THE CARDINAL’S GUARDS


D’Artagnan was acquainted with nobody in Paris. He went therefore to his
appointment with Athos without a second, determined to be satisfied with
those his adversary should choose. Besides, his intention was formed to
make the brave Musketeer all suitable apologies, but without meanness or
weakness, fearing that might result from this duel which generally
results from an affair of this kind, when a young and vigorous man
fights with an adversary who is wounded and weakened--if conquered, he
doubles the triumph of his antagonist; if a conqueror, he is accused of
foul play and want of courage.

Now, we must have badly painted the character of our adventure seeker,
or our readers must have already perceived that d’Artagnan was not an
ordinary man; therefore, while repeating to himself that his death was
inevitable, he did not make up his mind to die quietly, as one less
courageous and less restrained might have done in his place. He
reflected upon the different characters of those with whom he was going
to fight, and began to view his situation more clearly. He hoped, by
means of loyal excuses, to make a friend of Athos, whose lordly air and
austere bearing pleased him much. He flattered himself he should be able
to frighten Porthos with the adventure of the baldric, which he might,
if not killed upon the spot, relate to everybody a recital which, well
managed, would cover Porthos with ridicule. As to the astute Aramis, he
did not entertain much dread of him; and supposing he should be able to
get so far, he determined to dispatch him in good style or at least, by
hitting him in the face, as Caesar recommended his soldiers do to those
of Pompey, to damage forever the beauty of which he was so proud.

In addition to this, d’Artagnan possessed that invincible stock of
resolution which the counsels of his father had implanted in his heart:
“Endure nothing from anyone but the king, the cardinal, and Monsieur de
Treville.” He flew, then, rather than walked, toward the convent of the
Carmes Dechausses, or rather Deschaux, as it was called at that period,
a sort of building without a window, surrounded by barren fields--an
accessory to the Preaux-Clercs, and which was generally employed as the
place for the duels of men who had no time to lose.

When d’Artagnan arrived in sight of the bare spot of ground which
extended along the foot of the monastery, Athos had been waiting about
five minutes, and twelve o’clock was striking. He was, then, as punctual
as the Samaritan woman, and the most rigorous casuist with regard to
duels could have nothing to say.

Athos, who still suffered grievously from his wound, though it had been
dressed anew by M. de Treville’s surgeon, was seated on a post and
waiting for his adversary with hat in hand, his feather even touching
the ground.

“Monsieur,” said Athos, “I have engaged two of my friends as seconds;
but these two friends are not yet come, at which I am astonished, as it
is not at all their custom.”

“I have no seconds on my part, monsieur,” said d’Artagnan; “for having
only arrived yesterday in Paris, I as yet know no one but Monsieur de
Treville, to whom I was recommended by my father, who has the honor to
be, in some degree, one of his friends.”

Athos reflected for an instant. “You know no one but Monsieur de
Treville?” he asked.

“Yes, monsieur, I know only him.”

“Well, but then,” continued Athos, speaking half to himself, “if I kill
you, I shall have the air of a boy-slayer.”

“Not too much so,” replied d’Artagnan, with a bow that was not deficient
in dignity, “since you do me the honor to draw a sword with me while
suffering from a wound which is very inconvenient.”

“Very inconvenient, upon my word; and you hurt me devilishly, I can tell
you. But I will take the left hand--it is my custom in such
circumstances. Do not fancy that I do you a favor; I use either hand
easily. And it will be even a disadvantage to you; a left-handed man is
very troublesome to people who are not prepared for it. I regret I did
not inform you sooner of this circumstance.”

“You have truly, monsieur,” said d’Artagnan, bowing again, “a courtesy,
for which, I assure you, I am very grateful.”

“You confuse me,” replied Athos, with his gentlemanly air; “let us talk
of something else, if you please. Ah, s’blood, how you have hurt me! My
shoulder quite burns.”

“If you would permit me--” said d’Artagnan, with timidity.

“What, monsieur?”

“I have a miraculous balsam for wounds--a balsam given to me by my
mother and of which I have made a trial upon myself.”

“Well?”

“Well, I am sure that in less than three days this balsam would cure
you; and at the end of three days, when you would be cured--well, sir,
it would still do me a great honor to be your man.”

D’Artagnan spoke these words with a simplicity that did honor to his
courtesy, without throwing the least doubt upon his courage.

“PARDIEU, monsieur!” said Athos, “that’s a proposition that pleases me;
not that I can accept it, but a league off it savors of the gentleman.
Thus spoke and acted the gallant knights of the time of Charlemagne, in
whom every cavalier ought to seek his model. Unfortunately, we do not
live in the times of the great emperor, we live in the times of the
cardinal; and three days hence, however well the secret might be
guarded, it would be known, I say, that we were to fight, and our combat
would be prevented. I think these fellows will never come.”

“If you are in haste, monsieur,” said d’Artagnan, with the same
simplicity with which a moment before he had proposed to him to put off
the duel for three days, “and if it be your will to dispatch me at once,
do not inconvenience yourself, I pray you.”

“There is another word which pleases me,” cried Athos, with a gracious
nod to d’Artagnan. “That did not come from a man without a heart.
Monsieur, I love men of your kidney; and I foresee plainly that if we
don’t kill each other, I shall hereafter have much pleasure in your
conversation. We will wait for these gentlemen, so please you; I have
plenty of time, and it will be more correct. Ah, here is one of them, I
believe.”

In fact, at the end of the Rue Vaugirard the gigantic Porthos appeared.

“What!” cried d’Artagnan, “is your first witness Monsieur Porthos?”

“Yes, that disturbs you?”

“By no means.”

“And here is the second.”

D’Artagnan turned in the direction pointed to by Athos, and perceived
Aramis.

“What!” cried he, in an accent of greater astonishment than before,
“your second witness is Monsieur Aramis?”

“Doubtless! Are you not aware that we are never seen one without the
others, and that we are called among the Musketeers and the Guards, at
court and in the city, Athos, Porthos, and Aramis, or the Three
Inseparables? And yet, as you come from Dax or Pau--”

“From Tarbes,” said d’Artagnan.

“It is probable you are ignorant of this little fact,” said Athos.

“My faith!” replied d’Artagnan, “you are well named, gentlemen; and my
adventure, if it should make any noise, will prove at least that your
union is not founded upon contrasts.”

In the meantime, Porthos had come up, waved his hand to Athos, and then
turning toward d’Artagnan, stood quite astonished.

Let us say in passing that he had changed his baldric and relinquished
his cloak.

“Ah, ah!” said he, “what does this mean?”

“This is the gentleman I am going to fight with,” said Athos, pointing
to d’Artagnan with his hand and saluting him with the same gesture.

“Why, it is with him I am also going to fight,” said Porthos.

“But not before one o’clock,” replied d’Artagnan.

“And I also am to fight with this gentleman,” said Aramis, coming in his
turn onto the place.

“But not until two o’clock,” said d’Artagnan, with the same calmness.

“But what are you going to fight about, Athos?” asked Aramis.

“Faith! I don’t very well know. He hurt my shoulder. And you, Porthos?”

“Faith! I am going to fight--because I am going to fight,” answered
Porthos, reddening.

Athos, whose keen eye lost nothing, perceived a faintly sly smile pass
over the lips of the young Gascon as he replied, “We had a short
discussion upon dress.”

“And you, Aramis?” asked Athos.

“Oh, ours is a theological quarrel,” replied Aramis, making a sign to
d’Artagnan to keep secret the cause of their duel.

Athos indeed saw a second smile on the lips of d’Artagnan.

“Indeed?” said Athos.

“Yes; a passage of St. Augustine, upon which we could not agree,” said
the Gascon.

“Decidedly, this is a clever fellow,” murmured Athos.

“And now you are assembled, gentlemen,” said d’Artagnan, “permit me to
offer you my apologies.”

At this word APOLOGIES, a cloud passed over the brow of Athos, a haughty
smile curled the lip of Porthos, and a negative sign was the reply of
Aramis.

“You do not understand me, gentlemen,” said d’Artagnan, throwing up his
head, the sharp and bold lines of which were at the moment gilded by a
bright ray of the sun. “I asked to be excused in case I should not be
able to discharge my debt to all three; for Monsieur Athos has the right
to kill me first, which must much diminish the face-value of your bill,
Monsieur Porthos, and render yours almost null, Monsieur Aramis. And
now, gentlemen, I repeat, excuse me, but on that account only, and--on
guard!”

At these words, with the most gallant air possible, d’Artagnan drew his
sword.

The blood had mounted to the head of d’Artagnan, and at that moment he
would have drawn his sword against all the Musketeers in the kingdom as
willingly as he now did against Athos, Porthos, and Aramis.

It was a quarter past midday. The sun was in its zenith, and the spot
chosen for the scene of the duel was exposed to its full ardor.

“It is very hot,” said Athos, drawing his sword in its turn, “and yet I
cannot take off my doublet; for I just now felt my wound begin to bleed
again, and I should not like to annoy Monsieur with the sight of blood
which he has not drawn from me himself.”

“That is true, Monsieur,” replied d’Artagnan, “and whether drawn by
myself or another, I assure you I shall always view with regret the
blood of so brave a gentleman. I will therefore fight in my doublet,
like yourself.”

“Come, come, enough of such compliments!” cried Porthos. “Remember, we
are waiting for our turns.”

“Speak for yourself when you are inclined to utter such incongruities,”
interrupted Aramis. “For my part, I think what they say is very well
said, and quite worthy of two gentlemen.”

“When you please, monsieur,” said Athos, putting himself on guard.

“I waited your orders,” said d’Artagnan, crossing swords.

But scarcely had the two rapiers clashed, when a company of the Guards
of his Eminence, commanded by M. de Jussac, turned the corner of the
convent.

“The cardinal’s Guards!” cried Aramis and Porthos at the same time.
“Sheathe your swords, gentlemen, sheathe your swords!”

But it was too late. The two combatants had been seen in a position
which left no doubt of their intentions.

“Halloo!” cried Jussac, advancing toward them and making a sign to his
men to do so likewise, “halloo, Musketeers? Fighting here, are you? And
the edicts? What is become of them?”

“You are very generous, gentlemen of the Guards,” said Athos, full of
rancor, for Jussac was one of the aggressors of the preceding day. “If
we were to see you fighting, I can assure you that we would make no
effort to prevent you. Leave us alone, then, and you will enjoy a little
amusement without cost to yourselves.”

“Gentlemen,” said Jussac, “it is with great regret that I pronounce the
thing impossible. Duty before everything. Sheathe, then, if you please,
and follow us.”

“Monsieur,” said Aramis, parodying Jussac, “it would afford us great
pleasure to obey your polite invitation if it depended upon ourselves;
but unfortunately the thing is impossible--Monsieur de Treville has
forbidden it. Pass on your way, then; it is the best thing to do.”

This raillery exasperated Jussac. “We will charge upon you, then,” said
he, “if you disobey.”

“There are five of them,” said Athos, half aloud, “and we are but three;
we shall be beaten again, and must die on the spot, for, on my part, I
declare I will never appear again before the captain as a conquered
man.”

Athos, Porthos, and Aramis instantly drew near one another, while Jussac
drew up his soldiers.

This short interval was sufficient to determine d’Artagnan on the part
he was to take. It was one of those events which decide the life of a
man; it was a choice between the king and the cardinal--the choice made,
it must be persisted in. To fight, that was to disobey the law, that was
to risk his head, that was to make at one blow an enemy of a minister
more powerful than the king himself. All this the young man perceived,
and yet, to his praise we speak it, he did not hesitate a second.
Turning towards Athos and his friends, “Gentlemen,” said he, “allow me
to correct your words, if you please. You said you were but three, but
it appears to me we are four.”

“But you are not one of us,” said Porthos.

“That’s true,” replied d’Artagnan; “I have not the uniform, but I have
the spirit. My heart is that of a Musketeer; I feel it, monsieur, and
that impels me on.”

“Withdraw, young man,” cried Jussac, who doubtless, by his gestures and
the expression of his countenance, had guessed d’Artagnan’s design. “You
may retire; we consent to that. Save your skin; begone quickly.”

D’Artagnan did not budge.

“Decidedly, you are a brave fellow,” said Athos, pressing the young
man’s hand.

“Come, come, choose your part,” replied Jussac.

“Well,” said Porthos to Aramis, “we must do something.”

“Monsieur is full of generosity,” said Athos.

But all three reflected upon the youth of d’Artagnan, and dreaded his
inexperience.

“We should only be three, one of whom is wounded, with the addition of a
boy,” resumed Athos; “and yet it will not be the less said we were four
men.”

“Yes, but to yield!” said Porthos.

“That IS difficult,” replied Athos.

D’Artagnan comprehended their irresolution.

“Try me, gentlemen,” said he, “and I swear to you by my honor that I
will not go hence if we are conquered.”

“What is your name, my brave fellow?” said Athos.

“d’Artagnan, monsieur.”

“Well, then, Athos, Porthos, Aramis, and d’Artagnan, forward!” cried
Athos.

“Come, gentlemen, have you decided?” cried Jussac for the third time.

“It is done, gentlemen,” said Athos.

“And what is your choice?” asked Jussac.

“We are about to have the honor of charging you,” replied Aramis,
lifting his hat with one hand and drawing his sword with the other.

“Ah! You resist, do you?” cried Jussac.

“S’blood; does that astonish you?”

And the nine combatants rushed upon each other with a fury which however
did not exclude a certain degree of method.

Athos fixed upon a certain Cahusac, a favorite of the cardinal’s.
Porthos had Bicarat, and Aramis found himself opposed to two
adversaries. As to d’Artagnan, he sprang toward Jussac himself.

The heart of the young Gascon beat as if it would burst through his
side--not from fear, God be thanked, he had not the shade of it, but
with emulation; he fought like a furious tiger, turning ten times round
his adversary, and changing his ground and his guard twenty times.
Jussac was, as was then said, a fine blade, and had had much practice;
nevertheless it required all his skill to defend himself against an
adversary who, active and energetic, departed every instant from
received rules, attacking him on all sides at once, and yet parrying
like a man who had the greatest respect for his own epidermis.

This contest at length exhausted Jussac’s patience. Furious at being
held in check by one whom he had considered a boy, he became warm and
began to make mistakes. D’Artagnan, who though wanting in practice had a
sound theory, redoubled his agility. Jussac, anxious to put an end to
this, springing forward, aimed a terrible thrust at his adversary, but
the latter parried it; and while Jussac was recovering himself, glided
like a serpent beneath his blade, and passed his sword through his body.
Jussac fell like a dead mass.

D’Artagnan then cast an anxious and rapid glance over the field of
battle.

Aramis had killed one of his adversaries, but the other pressed him
warmly. Nevertheless, Aramis was in a good situation, and able to defend
himself.

Bicarat and Porthos had just made counterhits. Porthos had received a
thrust through his arm, and Bicarat one through his thigh. But neither
of these two wounds was serious, and they only fought more earnestly.

Athos, wounded anew by Cahusac, became evidently paler, but did not give
way a foot. He only changed his sword hand, and fought with his left
hand.

According to the laws of dueling at that period, d’Artagnan was at
liberty to assist whom he pleased. While he was endeavoring to find out
which of his companions stood in greatest need, he caught a glance from
Athos. The glance was of sublime eloquence. Athos would have died rather
than appeal for help; but he could look, and with that look ask
assistance. D’Artagnan interpreted it; with a terrible bound he sprang
to the side of Cahusac, crying, “To me, Monsieur Guardsman; I will slay
you!”

Cahusac turned. It was time; for Athos, whose great courage alone
supported him, sank upon his knee.

“S’blood!” cried he to d’Artagnan, “do not kill him, young man, I beg of
you. I have an old affair to settle with him when I am cured and sound
again. Disarm him only--make sure of his sword. That’s it! Very well
done!”

The exclamation was drawn from Athos by seeing the sword of Cahusac fly
twenty paces from him. D’Artagnan and Cahusac sprang forward at the same
instant, the one to recover, the other to obtain, the sword; but
d’Artagnan, being the more active, reached it first and placed his foot
upon it.

Cahusac immediately ran to the Guardsman whom Aramis had killed, seized
his rapier, and returned toward d’Artagnan; but on his way he met Athos,
who during his relief which d’Artagnan had procured him had recovered
his breath, and who, for fear that d’Artagnan would kill his enemy,
wished to resume the fight.

D’Artagnan perceived that it would be disobliging Athos not to leave him
alone; and in a few minutes Cahusac fell, with a sword thrust through
his throat.

At the same instant Aramis placed his sword point on the breast of his
fallen enemy, and forced him to ask for mercy.

There only then remained Porthos and Bicarat. Porthos made a thousand
flourishes, asking Bicarat what o’clock it could be, and offering him
his compliments upon his brother’s having just obtained a company in the
regiment of Navarre; but, jest as he might, he gained nothing. Bicarat
was one of those iron men who never fell dead.

Nevertheless, it was necessary to finish. The watch might come up and
take all the combatants, wounded or not, royalists or cardinalists.
Athos, Aramis, and d’Artagnan surrounded Bicarat, and required him to
surrender. Though alone against all and with a wound in his thigh,
Bicarat wished to hold out; but Jussac, who had risen upon his elbow,
cried out to him to yield. Bicarat was a Gascon, as d’Artagnan was; he
turned a deaf ear, and contented himself with laughing, and between two
parries finding time to point to a spot of earth with his sword, “Here,”
cried he, parodying a verse of the Bible, “here will Bicarat die; for I
only am left, and they seek my life.”

“But there are four against you; leave off, I command you.”

“Ah, if you command me, that’s another thing,” said Bicarat. “As you are
my commander, it is my duty to obey.” And springing backward, he broke
his sword across his knee to avoid the necessity of surrendering it,
threw the pieces over the convent wall, and crossed him arms, whistling
a cardinalist air.

Bravery is always respected, even in an enemy. The Musketeers saluted
Bicarat with their swords, and returned them to their sheaths.
D’Artagnan did the same. Then, assisted by Bicarat, the only one left
standing, they bore Jussac, Cahusac, and one of Aramis’s adversaries who
was only wounded, under the porch of the convent. The fourth, as we have
said, was dead. They then rang the bell, and carrying away four swords
out of five, they took their road, intoxicated with joy, toward the
hotel of M. de Treville.

They walked arm in arm, occupying the whole width of the street and
taking in every Musketeer they met, so that in the end it became a
triumphal march. The heart of d’Artagnan swam in delirium; he marched
between Athos and Porthos, pressing them tenderly.

“If I am not yet a Musketeer,” said he to his new friends, as he passed
through the gateway of M. de Treville’s hotel, “at least I have entered
upon my apprenticeship, haven’t I?”




6 HIS MAJESTY KING LOUIS XIII


This affair made a great noise. M. de Treville scolded his Musketeers in
public, and congratulated them in private; but as no time was to be lost
in gaining the king, M. de Treville hastened to report himself at the
Louvre. It was already too late. The king was closeted with the
cardinal, and M. de Treville was informed that the king was busy and
could not receive him at that moment. In the evening M. de Treville
attended the king’s gaming table. The king was winning; and as he was
very avaricious, he was in an excellent humor. Perceiving M. de Treville
at a distance--

“Come here, Monsieur Captain,” said he, “come here, that I may growl at
you. Do you know that his Eminence has been making fresh complaints
against your Musketeers, and that with so much emotion, that this
evening his Eminence is indisposed? Ah, these Musketeers of yours are
very devils--fellows to be hanged.”

“No, sire,” replied Treville, who saw at the first glance how things
would go, “on the contrary, they are good creatures, as meek as lambs,
and have but one desire, I’ll be their warranty. And that is that their
swords may never leave their scabbards but in your majesty’s service.
But what are they to do? The Guards of Monsieur the Cardinal are forever
seeking quarrels with them, and for the honor of the corps even, the
poor young men are obliged to defend themselves.”

“Listen to Monsieur de Treville,” said the king; “listen to him! Would
not one say he was speaking of a religious community? In truth, my dear
Captain, I have a great mind to take away your commission and give it to
Mademoiselle de Chemerault, to whom I promised an abbey. But don’t fancy
that I am going to take you on your bare word. I am called Louis the
Just, Monsieur de Treville, and by and by, by and by we will see.”

“Ah, sire; it is because I confide in that justice that I shall wait
patiently and quietly the good pleasure of your Majesty.”

“Wait, then, monsieur, wait,” said the king; “I will not detain you
long.”

In fact, fortune changed; and as the king began to lose what he had won,
he was not sorry to find an excuse for playing Charlemagne--if we may
use a gaming phrase of whose origin we confess our ignorance. The king
therefore arose a minute after, and putting the money which lay before
him into his pocket, the major part of which arose from his winnings,
“La Vieuville,” said he, “take my place; I must speak to Monsieur de
Treville on an affair of importance. Ah, I had eighty louis before me;
put down the same sum, so that they who have lost may have nothing to
complain of. Justice before everything.”

Then turning toward M. de Treville and walking with him toward the
embrasure of a window, “Well, monsieur,” continued he, “you say it is
his Eminence’s Guards who have sought a quarrel with your Musketeers?”

“Yes, sire, as they always do.”

“And how did the thing happen? Let us see, for you know, my dear
Captain, a judge must hear both sides.”

“Good Lord! In the most simple and natural manner possible. Three of my
best soldiers, whom your Majesty knows by name, and whose devotedness
you have more than once appreciated, and who have, I dare affirm to the
king, his service much at heart--three of my best soldiers, I say,
Athos, Porthos, and Aramis, had made a party of pleasure with a young
fellow from Gascony, whom I had introduced to them the same morning. The
party was to take place at St. Germain, I believe, and they had
appointed to meet at the Carmes-Deschaux, when they were disturbed by de
Jussac, Cahusac, Bicarat, and two other Guardsmen, who certainly did not
go there in such a numerous company without some ill intention against
the edicts.”

“Ah, ah! You incline me to think so,” said the king. “There is no doubt
they went thither to fight themselves.”

“I do not accuse them, sire; but I leave your Majesty to judge what five
armed men could possibly be going to do in such a deserted place as the
neighborhood of the Convent des Carmes.”

“Yes, you are right, Treville, you are right!”

“Then, upon seeing my Musketeers they changed their minds, and forgot
their private hatred for partisan hatred; for your Majesty cannot be
ignorant that the Musketeers, who belong to the king and nobody but the
king, are the natural enemies of the Guardsmen, who belong to the
cardinal.”

“Yes, Treville, yes,” said the king, in a melancholy tone; “and it is
very sad, believe me, to see thus two parties in France, two heads to
royalty. But all this will come to an end, Treville, will come to an
end. You say, then, that the Guardsmen sought a quarrel with the
Musketeers?”

“I say that it is probable that things have fallen out so, but I will
not swear to it, sire. You know how difficult it is to discover the
truth; and unless a man be endowed with that admirable instinct which
causes Louis XIII to be named the Just--”

“You are right, Treville; but they were not alone, your Musketeers. They
had a youth with them?”

“Yes, sire, and one wounded man; so that three of the king’s
Musketeers--one of whom was wounded--and a youth not only maintained
their ground against five of the most terrible of the cardinal’s
Guardsmen, but absolutely brought four of them to earth.”

“Why, this is a victory!” cried the king, all radiant, “a complete
victory!”

“Yes, sire; as complete as that of the Bridge of Ce.”

“Four men, one of them wounded, and a youth, say you?”

“One hardly a young man; but who, however, behaved himself so admirably
on this occasion that I will take the liberty of recommending him to
your Majesty.”

“How does he call himself?”

“d’Artagnan, sire; he is the son of one of my oldest friends--the son of
a man who served under the king your father, of glorious memory, in the
civil war.”

“And you say this young man behaved himself well? Tell me how,
Treville--you know how I delight in accounts of war and fighting.”

And Louis XIII twisted his mustache proudly, placing his hand upon his
hip.

“Sire,” resumed Treville, “as I told you, Monsieur d’Artagnan is little
more than a boy; and as he has not the honor of being a Musketeer, he
was dressed as a citizen. The Guards of the cardinal, perceiving his
youth and that he did not belong to the corps, invited him to retire
before they attacked.”

“So you may plainly see, Treville,” interrupted the king, “it was they
who attacked?”

“That is true, sire; there can be no more doubt on that head. They
called upon him then to retire; but he answered that he was a Musketeer
at heart, entirely devoted to your Majesty, and that therefore he would
remain with Messieurs the Musketeers.”

“Brave young man!” murmured the king.

“Well, he did remain with them; and your Majesty has in him so firm a
champion that it was he who gave Jussac the terrible sword thrust which
has made the cardinal so angry.”

“He who wounded Jussac!” cried the king, “he, a boy! Treville, that’s
impossible!”

“It is as I have the honor to relate it to your Majesty.”

“Jussac, one of the first swordsmen in the kingdom?”

“Well, sire, for once he found his master.”

“I will see this young man, Treville--I will see him; and if anything
can be done--well, we will make it our business.”

“When will your Majesty deign to receive him?”

“Tomorrow, at midday, Treville.”

“Shall I bring him alone?”

“No, bring me all four together. I wish to thank them all at once.
Devoted men are so rare, Treville, by the back staircase. It is useless
to let the cardinal know.”

“Yes, sire.”

“You understand, Treville--an edict is still an edict, it is forbidden
to fight, after all.”

“But this encounter, sire, is quite out of the ordinary conditions of a
duel. It is a brawl; and the proof is that there were five of the
cardinal’s Guardsmen against my three Musketeers and Monsieur
d’Artagnan.”

“That is true,” said the king; “but never mind, Treville, come still by
the back staircase.”

Treville smiled; but as it was indeed something to have prevailed upon
this child to rebel against his master, he saluted the king
respectfully, and with this agreement, took leave of him.

That evening the three Musketeers were informed of the honor accorded
them. As they had long been acquainted with the king, they were not much
excited; but d’Artagnan, with his Gascon imagination, saw in it his
future fortune, and passed the night in golden dreams. By eight o’clock
in the morning he was at the apartment of Athos.

D’Artagnan found the Musketeer dressed and ready to go out. As the hour
to wait upon the king was not till twelve, he had made a party with
Porthos and Aramis to play a game at tennis in a tennis court situated
near the stables of the Luxembourg. Athos invited d’Artagnan to follow
them; and although ignorant of the game, which he had never played, he
accepted, not knowing what to do with his time from nine o’clock in the
morning, as it then scarcely was, till twelve.

The two Musketeers were already there, and were playing together. Athos,
who was very expert in all bodily exercises, passed with d’Artagnan to
the opposite side and challenged them; but at the first effort he made,
although he played with his left hand, he found that his wound was yet
too recent to allow of such exertion. D’Artagnan remained, therefore,
alone; and as he declared he was too ignorant of the game to play it
regularly they only continued giving balls to one another without
counting. But one of these balls, launched by Porthos’ herculean hand,
passed so close to d’Artagnan’s face that he thought that if, instead of
passing near, it had hit him, his audience would have been probably
lost, as it would have been impossible for him to present himself before
the king. Now, as upon this audience, in his Gascon imagination,
depended his future life, he saluted Aramis and Porthos politely,
declaring that he would not resume the game until he should be prepared
to play with them on more equal terms, and went and took his place near
the cord and in the gallery.

Unfortunately for d’Artagnan, among the spectators was one of his
Eminence’s Guardsmen, who, still irritated by the defeat of his
companions, which had happened only the day before, had promised himself
to seize the first opportunity of avenging it. He believed this
opportunity was now come and addressed his neighbor: “It is not
astonishing that that young man should be afraid of a ball, for he is
doubtless a Musketeer apprentice.”

D’Artagnan turned round as if a serpent had stung him, and fixed his
eyes intensely upon the Guardsman who had just made this insolent
speech.

“PARDIEU,” resumed the latter, twisting his mustache, “look at me as
long as you like, my little gentleman! I have said what I have said.”

“And as since that which you have said is too clear to require any
explanation,” replied d’Artagnan, in a low voice, “I beg you to follow
me.”

“And when?” asked the Guardsman, with the same jeering air.

“At once, if you please.”

“And you know who I am, without doubt?”

“I? I am completely ignorant; nor does it much disquiet me.”

“You’re in the wrong there; for if you knew my name, perhaps you would
not be so pressing.”

“What is your name?”

“Bernajoux, at your service.”

“Well, then, Monsieur Bernajoux,” said d’Artagnan, tranquilly, “I will
wait for you at the door.”

“Go, monsieur, I will follow you.”

“Do not hurry yourself, monsieur, lest it be observed that we go out
together. You must be aware that for our undertaking, company would be
in the way.”

“That’s true,” said the Guardsman, astonished that his name had not
produced more effect upon the young man.

Indeed, the name of Bernajoux was known to all the world, d’Artagnan
alone excepted, perhaps; for it was one of those which figured most
frequently in the daily brawls which all the edicts of the cardinal
could not repress.

Porthos and Aramis were so engaged with their game, and Athos was
watching them with so much attention, that they did not even perceive
their young companion go out, who, as he had told the Guardsman of his
Eminence, stopped outside the door. An instant after, the Guardsman
descended in his turn. As d’Artagnan had no time to lose, on account of
the audience of the king, which was fixed for midday, he cast his eyes
around, and seeing that the street was empty, said to his adversary, “My
faith! It is fortunate for you, although your name is Bernajoux, to have
only to deal with an apprentice Musketeer. Never mind; be content, I
will do my best. On guard!”

“But,” said he whom d’Artagnan thus provoked, “it appears to me that
this place is badly chosen, and that we should be better behind the
Abbey St. Germain or in the Pre-aux-Clercs.”

“What you say is full of sense,” replied d’Artagnan; “but unfortunately
I have very little time to spare, having an appointment at twelve
precisely. On guard, then, monsieur, on guard!”

Bernajoux was not a man to have such a compliment paid to him twice. In
an instant his sword glittered in his hand, and he sprang upon his
adversary, whom, thanks to his great youthfulness, he hoped to
intimidate.

But d’Artagnan had on the preceding day served his apprenticeship. Fresh
sharpened by his victory, full of hopes of future favor, he was resolved
not to recoil a step. So the two swords were crossed close to the hilts,
and as d’Artagnan stood firm, it was his adversary who made the
retreating step; but d’Artagnan seized the moment at which, in this
movement, the sword of Bernajoux deviated from the line. He freed his
weapon, made a lunge, and touched his adversary on the shoulder.
D’Artagnan immediately made a step backward and raised his sword; but
Bernajoux cried out that it was nothing, and rushing blindly upon him,
absolutely spitted himself upon d’Artagnan’s sword. As, however, he did
not fall, as he did not declare himself conquered, but only broke away
toward the hotel of M. de la Tremouille, in whose service he had a
relative, d’Artagnan was ignorant of the seriousness of the last wound
his adversary had received, and pressing him warmly, without doubt would
soon have completed his work with a third blow, when the noise which
arose from the street being heard in the tennis court, two of the
friends of the Guardsman, who had seen him go out after exchanging some
words with d’Artagnan, rushed, sword in hand, from the court, and fell
upon the conqueror. But Athos, Porthos, and Aramis quickly appeared in
their turn, and the moment the two Guardsmen attacked their young
companion, drove them back. Bernajoux now fell, and as the Guardsmen
were only two against four, they began to cry, “To the rescue! The Hotel
de la Tremouille!” At these cries, all who were in the hotel rushed out
and fell upon the four companions, who on their side cried aloud, “To
the rescue, Musketeers!”

This cry was generally heeded; for the Musketeers were known to be
enemies of the cardinal, and were beloved on account of the hatred they
bore to his Eminence. Thus the soldiers of other companies than those
which belonged to the Red Duke, as Aramis had called him, often took
part with the king’s Musketeers in these quarrels. Of three Guardsmen of
the company of M. Dessessart who were passing, two came to the
assistance of the four companions, while the other ran toward the hotel
of M. de Treville, crying, “To the rescue, Musketeers! To the rescue!”
As usual, this hotel was full of soldiers of this company, who hastened
to the succor of their comrades. The MELEE became general, but strength
was on the side of the Musketeers. The cardinal’s Guards and M. de la
Tremouille’s people retreated into the hotel, the doors of which they
closed just in time to prevent their enemies from entering with them. As
to the wounded man, he had been taken in at once, and, as we have said,
in a very bad state.

Excitement was at its height among the Musketeers and their allies, and
they even began to deliberate whether they should not set fire to the
hotel to punish the insolence of M. de la Tremouille’s domestics in
daring to make a SORTIE upon the king’s Musketeers. The proposition had
been made, and received with enthusiasm, when fortunately eleven o’clock
struck. D’Artagnan and his companions remembered their audience, and as
they would very much have regretted that such an opportunity should be
lost, they succeeded in calming their friends, who contented themselves
with hurling some paving stones against the gates; but the gates were
too strong. They soon tired of the sport. Besides, those who must be
considered the leaders of the enterprise had quit the group and were
making their way toward the hotel of M. de Treville, who was waiting for
them, already informed of this fresh disturbance.

“Quick to the Louvre,” said he, “to the Louvre without losing an
instant, and let us endeavor to see the king before he is prejudiced by
the cardinal. We will describe the thing to him as a consequence of the
affair of yesterday, and the two will pass off together.”

M de Treville, accompanied by the four young fellows, directed his
course toward the Louvre; but to the great astonishment of the captain
of the Musketeers, he was informed that the king had gone stag hunting
in the forest of St. Germain. M. de Treville required this intelligence
to be repeated to him twice, and each time his companions saw his brow
become darker.

“Had his Majesty,” asked he, “any intention of holding this hunting
party yesterday?”

“No, your Excellency,” replied the valet de chambre, “the Master of the
Hounds came this morning to inform him that he had marked down a stag.
At first the king answered that he would not go; but he could not resist
his love of sport, and set out after dinner.”

“And the king has seen the cardinal?” asked M. de Treville.

“In all probability he has,” replied the valet, “for I saw the horses
harnessed to his Eminence’s carriage this morning, and when I asked
where he was going, they told me, ‘To St. Germain.’”

“He is beforehand with us,” said M. de Treville. “Gentlemen, I will see
the king this evening; but as to you, I do not advise you to risk doing
so.”

This advice was too reasonable, and moreover came from a man who knew
the king too well, to allow the four young men to dispute it. M. de
Treville recommended everyone to return home and wait for news.

On entering his hotel, M. de Treville thought it best to be first in
making the complaint. He sent one of his servants to M. de la Tremouille
with a letter in which he begged of him to eject the cardinal’s
Guardsmen from his house, and to reprimand his people for their audacity
in making SORTIE against the king’s Musketeers. But M. de la
Tremouille--already prejudiced by his esquire, whose relative, as we
already know, Bernajoux was--replied that it was neither for M. de
Treville nor the Musketeers to complain, but, on the contrary, for him,
whose people the Musketeers had assaulted and whose hotel they had
endeavored to burn. Now, as the debate between these two nobles might
last a long time, each becoming, naturally, more firm in his own
opinion, M. de Treville thought of an expedient which might terminate it
quietly. This was to go himself to M. de la Tremouille.

He repaired, therefore, immediately to his hotel, and caused himself to
be announced.

The two nobles saluted each other politely, for if no friendship existed
between them, there was at least esteem. Both were men of courage and
honor; and as M. de la Tremouille--a Protestant, and seeing the king
seldom--was of no party, he did not, in general, carry any bias into his
social relations. This time, however, his address, although polite, was
cooler than usual.

“Monsieur,” said M. de Treville, “we fancy that we have each cause to
complain of the other, and I am come to endeavor to clear up this
affair.”

“I have no objection,” replied M. de la Tremouille, “but I warn you that
I am well informed, and all the fault is with your Musketeers.”

“You are too just and reasonable a man, monsieur!” said Treville, “not
to accept the proposal I am about to make to you.”

“Make it, monsieur, I listen.”

“How is Monsieur Bernajoux, your esquire’s relative?”

“Why, monsieur, very ill indeed! In addition to the sword thrust in his
arm, which is not dangerous, he has received another right through his
lungs, of which the doctor says bad things.”

“But has the wounded man retained his senses?”

“Perfectly.”

“Does he talk?”

“With difficulty, but he can speak.”

“Well, monsieur, let us go to him. Let us adjure him, in the name of the
God before whom he must perhaps appear, to speak the truth. I will take
him for judge in his own cause, monsieur, and will believe what he will
say.”

M de la Tremouille reflected for an instant; then as it was difficult to
suggest a more reasonable proposal, he agreed to it.

Both descended to the chamber in which the wounded man lay. The latter,
on seeing these two noble lords who came to visit him, endeavored to
raise himself up in his bed; but he was too weak, and exhausted by the
effort, he fell back again almost senseless.

M de la Tremouille approached him, and made him inhale some salts, which
recalled him to life. Then M. de Treville, unwilling that it should be
thought that he had influenced the wounded man, requested M. de la
Tremouille to interrogate him himself.

That happened which M. de Treville had foreseen. Placed between life and
death, as Bernajoux was, he had no idea for a moment of concealing the
truth; and he described to the two nobles the affair exactly as it had
passed.

This was all that M. de Treville wanted. He wished Bernajoux a speedy
convalescence, took leave of M. de la Tremouille, returned to his hotel,
and immediately sent word to the four friends that he awaited their
company at dinner.

M de Treville entertained good company, wholly anticardinalist, though.
It may easily be understood, therefore, that the conversation during the
whole of dinner turned upon the two checks that his Eminence’s Guardsmen
had received. Now, as d’Artagnan had been the hero of these two fights,
it was upon him that all the felicitations fell, which Athos, Porthos,
and Aramis abandoned to him, not only as good comrades, but as men who
had so often had their turn that they could very well afford him his.

Toward six o’clock M. de Treville announced that it was time to go to
the Louvre; but as the hour of audience granted by his Majesty was past,
instead of claiming the ENTREE by the back stairs, he placed himself
with the four young men in the antechamber. The king had not yet
returned from hunting. Our young men had been waiting about half an
hour, amid a crowd of courtiers, when all the doors were thrown open,
and his Majesty was announced.

At his announcement d’Artagnan felt himself tremble to the very marrow
of his bones. The coming instant would in all probability decide the
rest of his life. His eyes therefore were fixed in a sort of agony upon
the door through which the king must enter.

Louis XIII appeared, walking fast. He was in hunting costume covered
with dust, wearing large boots, and holding a whip in his hand. At the
first glance, d’Artagnan judged that the mind of the king was stormy.

This disposition, visible as it was in his Majesty, did not prevent the
courtiers from ranging themselves along his pathway. In royal
antechambers it is worth more to be viewed with an angry eye than not to
be seen at all. The three Musketeers therefore did not hesitate to make
a step forward. D’Artagnan on the contrary remained concealed behind
them; but although the king knew Athos, Porthos, and Aramis personally,
he passed before them without speaking or looking--indeed, as if he had
never seen them before. As for M. de Treville, when the eyes of the king
fell upon him, he sustained the look with so much firmness that it was
the king who dropped his eyes; after which his Majesty, grumbling,
entered his apartment.

“Matters go but badly,” said Athos, smiling; “and we shall not be made
Chevaliers of the Order this time.”

“Wait here ten minutes,” said M. de Treville; “and if at the expiration
of ten minutes you do not see me come out, return to my hotel, for it
will be useless for you to wait for me longer.”

The four young men waited ten minutes, a quarter of an hour, twenty
minutes; and seeing that M. de Treville did not return, went away very
uneasy as to what was going to happen.

M de Treville entered the king’s cabinet boldly, and found his Majesty
in a very ill humor, seated on an armchair, beating his boot with the
handle of his whip. This, however, did not prevent his asking, with the
greatest coolness, after his Majesty’s health.

“Bad, monsieur, bad!” replied the king; “I am bored.”

This was, in fact, the worst complaint of Louis XIII, who would
sometimes take one of his courtiers to a window and say, “Monsieur
So-and-so, let us weary ourselves together.”

“How! Your Majesty is bored? Have you not enjoyed the pleasures of the
chase today?”

“A fine pleasure, indeed, monsieur! Upon my soul, everything
degenerates; and I don’t know whether it is the game which leaves no
scent, or the dogs that have no noses. We started a stag of ten
branches. We chased him for six hours, and when he was near being
taken--when St.-Simon was already putting his horn to his mouth to sound
the mort--crack, all the pack takes the wrong scent and sets off after a
two-year-older. I shall be obliged to give up hunting, as I have given
up hawking. Ah, I am an unfortunate king, Monsieur de Treville! I had
but one gerfalcon, and he died day before yesterday.”

“Indeed, sire, I wholly comprehend your disappointment. The misfortune
is great; but I think you have still a good number of falcons, sparrow
hawks, and tiercels.”

“And not a man to instruct them. Falconers are declining. I know no one
but myself who is acquainted with the noble art of venery. After me it
will all be over, and people will hunt with gins, snares, and traps. If
I had but the time to train pupils! But there is the cardinal always at
hand, who does not leave me a moment’s repose; who talks to me about
Spain, who talks to me about Austria, who talks to me about England! Ah!
A PROPOS of the cardinal, Monsieur de Treville, I am vexed with you!”

This was the chance at which M. de Treville waited for the king. He knew
the king of old, and he knew that all these complaints were but a
preface--a sort of excitation to encourage himself--and that he had now
come to his point at last.

“And in what have I been so unfortunate as to displease your Majesty?”
asked M. de Treville, feigning the most profound astonishment.

“Is it thus you perform your charge, monsieur?” continued the king,
without directly replying to de Treville’s question. “Is it for this I
name you captain of my Musketeers, that they should assassinate a man,
disturb a whole quarter, and endeavor to set fire to Paris, without your
saying a word? But yet,” continued the king, “undoubtedly my haste
accuses you wrongfully; without doubt the rioters are in prison, and you
come to tell me justice is done.”

“Sire,” replied M. de Treville, calmly, “on the contrary, I come to
demand it of you.”

“And against whom?” cried the king.

“Against calumniators,” said M. de Treville.

“Ah! This is something new,” replied the king. “Will you tell me that
your three damned Musketeers, Athos, Porthos, and Aramis, and your
youngster from Bearn, have not fallen, like so many furies, upon poor
Bernajoux, and have not maltreated him in such a fashion that probably
by this time he is dead? Will you tell me that they did not lay siege to
the hotel of the Duc de la Tremouille, and that they did not endeavor to
burn it?--which would not, perhaps, have been a great misfortune in time
of war, seeing that it is nothing but a nest of Huguenots, but which is,
in time of peace, a frightful example. Tell me, now, can you deny all
this?”

“And who told you this fine story, sire?” asked Treville, quietly.

“Who has told me this fine story, monsieur? Who should it be but he who
watches while I sleep, who labors while I amuse myself, who conducts
everything at home and abroad--in France as in Europe?”

“Your Majesty probably refers to God,” said M. de Treville; “for I know
no one except God who can be so far above your Majesty.”

“No, monsieur; I speak of the prop of the state, of my only servant, of
my only friend--of the cardinal.”

“His Eminence is not his holiness, sire.”

“What do you mean by that, monsieur?”

“That it is only the Pope who is infallible, and that this infallibility
does not extend to cardinals.”

“You mean to say that he deceives me; you mean to say that he betrays
me? You accuse him, then? Come, speak; avow freely that you accuse him!”

“No, sire, but I say that he deceives himself. I say that he is
ill-informed. I say that he has hastily accused your Majesty’s
Musketeers, toward whom he is unjust, and that he has not obtained his
information from good sources.”

“The accusation comes from Monsieur de la Tremouille, from the duke
himself. What do you say to that?”

“I might answer, sire, that he is too deeply interested in the question
to be a very impartial witness; but so far from that, sire, I know the
duke to be a royal gentleman, and I refer the matter to him--but upon
one condition, sire.”

“What?”

“It is that your Majesty will make him come here, will interrogate him
yourself, TETE-A-TETE, without witnesses, and that I shall see your
Majesty as soon as you have seen the duke.”

“What, then! You will bind yourself,” cried the king, “by what Monsieur
de la Tremouille shall say?”

“Yes, sire.”

“You will accept his judgment?”

“Undoubtedly.”

“And you will submit to the reparation he may require?”

“Certainly.”

“La Chesnaye,” said the king. “La Chesnaye!”

Louis XIII’s confidential valet, who never left the door, entered in
reply to the call.

“La Chesnaye,” said the king, “let someone go instantly and find
Monsieur de la Tremouille; I wish to speak with him this evening.”

“Your Majesty gives me your word that you will not see anyone between
Monsieur de la Tremouille and myself?”

“Nobody, by the faith of a gentleman.”

“Tomorrow, then, sire?”

“Tomorrow, monsieur.”

“At what o’clock, please your Majesty?”

“At any hour you will.”

“But in coming too early I should be afraid of awakening your Majesty.”

“Awaken me! Do you think I ever sleep, then? I sleep no longer,
monsieur. I sometimes dream, that’s all. Come, then, as early as you
like--at seven o’clock; but beware, if you and your Musketeers are
guilty.”

“If my Musketeers are guilty, sire, the guilty shall be placed in your
Majesty’s hands, who will dispose of them at your good pleasure. Does
your Majesty require anything further? Speak, I am ready to obey.”

“No, monsieur, no; I am not called Louis the Just without reason.
Tomorrow, then, monsieur--tomorrow.”

“Till then, God preserve your Majesty!”

However ill the king might sleep, M. de Treville slept still worse. He
had ordered his three Musketeers and their companion to be with him at
half past six in the morning. He took them with him, without encouraging
them or promising them anything, and without concealing from them that
their luck, and even his own, depended upon the cast of the dice.

Arrived at the foot of the back stairs, he desired them to wait. If the
king was still irritated against them, they would depart without being
seen; if the king consented to see them, they would only have to be
called.

On arriving at the king’s private antechamber, M. de Treville found La
Chesnaye, who informed him that they had not been able to find M. de la
Tremouille on the preceding evening at his hotel, that he returned too
late to present himself at the Louvre, that he had only that moment
arrived and that he was at that very hour with the king.

This circumstance pleased M. de Treville much, as he thus became certain
that no foreign suggestion could insinuate itself between M. de la
Tremouille’s testimony and himself.

In fact, ten minutes had scarcely passed away when the door of the
king’s closet opened, and M. de Treville saw M. de la Tremouille come
out. The duke came straight up to him, and said: “Monsieur de Treville,
his Majesty has just sent for me in order to inquire respecting the
circumstances which took place yesterday at my hotel. I have told him
the truth; that is to say, that the fault lay with my people, and that I
was ready to offer you my excuses. Since I have the good fortune to meet
you, I beg you to receive them, and to hold me always as one of your
friends.”

“Monsieur the Duke,” said M. de Treville, “I was so confident of your
loyalty that I required no other defender before his Majesty than
yourself. I find that I have not been mistaken, and I thank you that
there is still one man in France of whom may be said, without
disappointment, what I have said of you.”

“That’s well said,” cried the king, who had heard all these compliments
through the open door; “only tell him, Treville, since he wishes to be
considered your friend, that I also wish to be one of his, but he
neglects me; that it is nearly three years since I have seen him, and
that I never do see him unless I send for him. Tell him all this for me,
for these are things which a king cannot say for himself.”

“Thanks, sire, thanks,” said the duke; “but your Majesty may be assured
that it is not those--I do not speak of Monsieur de Treville--whom your
Majesty sees at all hours of the day that are most devoted to you.”

“Ah! You have heard what I said? So much the better, Duke, so much the
better,” said the king, advancing toward the door. “Ah! It is you,
Treville. Where are your Musketeers? I told you the day before yesterday
to bring them with you; why have you not done so?”

“They are below, sire, and with your permission La Chesnaye will bid
them come up.”

“Yes, yes, let them come up immediately. It is nearly eight o’clock, and
at nine I expect a visit. Go, Monsieur Duke, and return often. Come in,
Treville.”

The Duke saluted and retired. At the moment he opened the door, the
three Musketeers and d’Artagnan, conducted by La Chesnaye, appeared at
the top of the staircase.

“Come in, my braves,” said the king, “come in; I am going to scold you.”

The Musketeers advanced, bowing, d’Artagnan following closely behind
them.

“What the devil!” continued the king. “Seven of his Eminence’s Guards
placed HORS DE COMBAT by you four in two days! That’s too many,
gentlemen, too many! If you go on so, his Eminence will be forced to
renew his company in three weeks, and I to put the edicts in force in
all their rigor. One now and then I don’t say much about; but seven in
two days, I repeat, it is too many, it is far too many!”

“Therefore, sire, your Majesty sees that they are come, quite contrite
and repentant, to offer you their excuses.”

“Quite contrite and repentant! Hem!” said the king. “I place no
confidence in their hypocritical faces. In particular, there is one
yonder of a Gascon look. Come hither, monsieur.”

D’Artagnan, who understood that it was to him this compliment was
addressed, approached, assuming a most deprecating air.

“Why, you told me he was a young man? This is a boy, Treville, a mere
boy! Do you mean to say that it was he who bestowed that severe thrust
at Jussac?”

“And those two equally fine thrusts at Bernajoux.”

“Truly!”

“Without reckoning,” said Athos, “that if he had not rescued me from the
hands of Cahusac, I should not now have the honor of making my very
humble reverence to your Majesty.”

“Why he is a very devil, this Bearnais! VENTRE-SAINT-GRIS, Monsieur de
Treville, as the king my father would have said. But at this sort of
work, many doublets must be slashed and many swords broken. Now, Gascons
are always poor, are they not?”

“Sire, I can assert that they have hitherto discovered no gold mines in
their mountains; though the Lord owes them this miracle in recompense
for the manner in which they supported the pretensions of the king your
father.”

“Which is to say that the Gascons made a king of me, myself, seeing that
I am my father’s son, is it not, Treville? Well, happily, I don’t say
nay to it. La Chesnaye, go and see if by rummaging all my pockets you
can find forty pistoles; and if you can find them, bring them to me. And
now let us see, young man, with your hand upon your conscience, how did
all this come to pass?”

D’Artagnan related the adventure of the preceding day in all its
details; how, not having been able to sleep for the joy he felt in the
expectation of seeing his Majesty, he had gone to his three friends
three hours before the hour of audience; how they had gone together to
the tennis court, and how, upon the fear he had manifested lest he
receive a ball in the face, he had been jeered at by Bernajoux, who had
nearly paid for his jeer with his life, and M. de la Tremouille, who had
nothing to do with the matter, with the loss of his hotel.

“This is all very well,” murmured the king, “yes, this is just the
account the duke gave me of the affair. Poor cardinal! Seven men in two
days, and those of his very best! But that’s quite enough, gentlemen;
please to understand, that’s enough. You have taken your revenge for the
Rue Ferou, and even exceeded it; you ought to be satisfied.”

“If your Majesty is so,” said Treville, “we are.”

“Oh, yes; I am,” added the king, taking a handful of gold from La
Chesnaye, and putting it into the hand of d’Artagnan. “Here,” said he,
“is a proof of my satisfaction.”

At this epoch, the ideas of pride which are in fashion in our days did
not prevail. A gentleman received, from hand to hand, money from the
king, and was not the least in the world humiliated. D’Artagnan put his
forty pistoles into his pocket without any scruple--on the contrary,
thanking his Majesty greatly.

“There,” said the king, looking at a clock, “there, now, as it is half
past eight, you may retire; for as I told you, I expect someone at nine.
Thanks for your devotedness, gentlemen. I may continue to rely upon it,
may I not?”

“Oh, sire!” cried the four companions, with one voice, “we would allow
ourselves to be cut to pieces in your Majesty’s service.”

“Well, well, but keep whole; that will be better, and you will be more
useful to me. Treville,” added the king, in a low voice, as the others
were retiring, “as you have no room in the Musketeers, and as we have
besides decided that a novitiate is necessary before entering that
corps, place this young man in the company of the Guards of Monsieur
Dessessart, your brother-in-law. Ah, PARDIEU, Treville! I enjoy
beforehand the face the cardinal will make. He will be furious; but I
don’t care. I am doing what is right.”

The king waved his hand to Treville, who left him and rejoined the
Musketeers, whom he found sharing the forty pistoles with d’Artagnan.

The cardinal, as his Majesty had said, was really furious, so furious
that during eight days he absented himself from the king’s gaming table.
This did not prevent the king from being as complacent to him as
possible whenever he met him, or from asking in the kindest tone, “Well,
Monsieur Cardinal, how fares it with that poor Jussac and that poor
Bernajoux of yours?”




7 THE INTERIOR* OF THE MUSKETEERS


When d’Artagnan was out of the Louvre, and consulted his friends upon
the use he had best make of his share of the forty pistoles, Athos
advised him to order a good repast at the Pomme-de-Pin, Porthos to
engage a lackey, and Aramis to provide himself with a suitable mistress.

    _*Domestic affairs, housekeeping_

The repast was carried into effect that very day, and the lackey waited
at table. The repast had been ordered by Athos, and the lackey furnished
by Porthos. He was a Picard, whom the glorious Musketeer had picked up
on the Bridge Tournelle, making rings and plashing in the water.

Porthos pretended that this occupation was proof of a reflective and
contemplative organization, and he had brought him away without any
other recommendation. The noble carriage of this gentleman, for whom he
believed himself to be engaged, had won Planchet--that was the name of
the Picard. He felt a slight disappointment, however, when he saw that
this place was already taken by a compeer named Mousqueton, and when
Porthos signified to him that the state of his household, though great,
would not support two servants, and that he must enter into the service
of d’Artagnan. Nevertheless, when he waited at the dinner given by his
master, and saw him take out a handful of gold to pay for it, he
believed his fortune made, and returned thanks to heaven for having
thrown him into the service of such a Croesus. He preserved this opinion
even after the feast, with the remnants of which he repaired his own
long abstinence; but when in the evening he made his master’s bed, the
chimeras of Planchet faded away. The bed was the only one in the
apartment, which consisted of an antechamber and a bedroom. Planchet
slept in the antechamber upon a coverlet taken from the bed of
d’Artagnan, and which d’Artagnan from that time made shift to do
without.

Athos, on his part, had a valet whom he had trained in his service in a
thoroughly peculiar fashion, and who was named Grimaud. He was very
taciturn, this worthy signor. Be it understood we are speaking of Athos.
During the five or six years that he had lived in the strictest intimacy
with his companions, Porthos and Aramis, they could remember having
often seen him smile, but had never heard him laugh. His words were
brief and expressive, conveying all that was meant, and no more; no
embellishments, no embroidery, no arabesques. His conversation was a
matter of fact, without a single romance.

Although Athos was scarcely thirty years old, and was of great personal
beauty and intelligence of mind, no one knew whether he had ever had a
mistress. He never spoke of women. He certainly did not prevent others
from speaking of them before him, although it was easy to perceive that
this kind of conversation, in which he only mingled by bitter words and
misanthropic remarks, was very disagreeable to him. His reserve, his
roughness, and his silence made almost an old man of him. He had, then,
in order not to disturb his habits, accustomed Grimaud to obey him upon
a simple gesture or upon a simple movement of his lips. He never spoke
to him, except under the most extraordinary occasions.

Sometimes, Grimaud, who feared his master as he did fire, while
entertaining a strong attachment to his person and a great veneration
for his talents, believed he perfectly understood what he wanted, flew
to execute the order received, and did precisely the contrary. Athos
then shrugged his shoulders, and, without putting himself in a passion,
thrashed Grimaud. On these days he spoke a little.

Porthos, as we have seen, had a character exactly opposite to that of
Athos. He not only talked much, but he talked loudly, little caring, we
must render him that justice, whether anybody listened to him or not. He
talked for the pleasure of talking and for the pleasure of hearing
himself talk. He spoke upon all subjects except the sciences, alleging
in this respect the inveterate hatred he had borne to scholars from his
childhood. He had not so noble an air as Athos, and the commencement of
their intimacy often rendered him unjust toward that gentleman, whom he
endeavored to eclipse by his splendid dress. But with his simple
Musketeer’s uniform and nothing but the manner in which he threw back
his head and advanced his foot, Athos instantly took the place which was
his due and consigned the ostentatious Porthos to the second rank.
Porthos consoled himself by filling the antechamber of M. de Treville
and the guardroom of the Louvre with the accounts of his love scrapes,
after having passed from professional ladies to military ladies, from
the lawyer’s dame to the baroness, there was question of nothing less
with Porthos than a foreign princess, who was enormously fond of him.

An old proverb says, “Like master, like man.” Let us pass, then, from
the valet of Athos to the valet of Porthos, from Grimaud to Mousqueton.

Mousqueton was a Norman, whose pacific name of Boniface his master had
changed into the infinitely more sonorous name of Mousqueton. He had
entered the service of Porthos upon condition that he should only be
clothed and lodged, though in a handsome manner; but he claimed two
hours a day to himself, consecrated to an employment which would provide
for his other wants. Porthos agreed to the bargain; the thing suited him
wonderfully well. He had doublets cut out of his old clothes and
cast-off cloaks for Mousqueton, and thanks to a very intelligent tailor,
who made his clothes look as good as new by turning them, and whose wife
was suspected of wishing to make Porthos descend from his aristocratic
habits, Mousqueton made a very good figure when attending on his master.

As for Aramis, of whom we believe we have sufficiently explained the
character--a character which, like that of his companions, we shall be
able to follow in its development--his lackey was called Bazin. Thanks
to the hopes which his master entertained of someday entering into
orders, he was always clothed in black, as became the servant of a
churchman. He was a Berrichon, thirty-five or forty years old, mild,
peaceable, sleek, employing the leisure his master left him in the
perusal of pious works, providing rigorously for two a dinner of few
dishes, but excellent. For the rest, he was dumb, blind, and deaf, and
of unimpeachable fidelity.

And now that we are acquainted, superficially at least, with the masters
and the valets, let us pass on to the dwellings occupied by each of
them.

Athos dwelt in the Rue Ferou, within two steps of the Luxembourg. His
apartment consisted of two small chambers, very nicely fitted up, in a
furnished house, the hostess of which, still young and still really
handsome, cast tender glances uselessly at him. Some fragments of past
splendor appeared here and there upon the walls of this modest lodging;
a sword, for example, richly embossed, which belonged by its make to the
times of Francis I, the hilt of which alone, encrusted with precious
stones, might be worth two hundred pistoles, and which, nevertheless, in
his moments of greatest distress Athos had never pledged or offered for
sale. It had long been an object of ambition for Porthos. Porthos would
have given ten years of his life to possess this sword.

One day, when he had an appointment with a duchess, he endeavored even
to borrow it of Athos. Athos, without saying anything, emptied his
pockets, got together all his jewels, purses, aiguillettes, and gold
chains, and offered them all to Porthos; but as to the sword, he said it
was sealed to its place and should never quit it until its master should
himself quit his lodgings. In addition to the sword, there was a
portrait representing a nobleman of the time of Henry III, dressed with
the greatest elegance, and who wore the Order of the Holy Ghost; and
this portrait had certain resemblances of lines with Athos, certain
family likenesses which indicated that this great noble, a knight of the
Order of the King, was his ancestor.

Besides these, a casket of magnificent goldwork, with the same arms as
the sword and the portrait, formed a middle ornament to the mantelpiece,
and assorted badly with the rest of the furniture. Athos always carried
the key of this coffer about him; but he one day opened it before
Porthos, and Porthos was convinced that this coffer contained nothing
but letters and papers--love letters and family papers, no doubt.

Porthos lived in an apartment, large in size and of very sumptuous
appearance, in the Rue du Vieux-Colombier. Every time he passed with a
friend before his windows, at one of which Mousqueton was sure to be
placed in full livery, Porthos raised his head and his hand, and said,
“That is my abode!” But he was never to be found at home; he never
invited anybody to go up with him, and no one could form an idea of what
his sumptuous apartment contained in the shape of real riches.

As to Aramis, he dwelt in a little lodging composed of a boudoir, an
eating room, and a bedroom, which room, situated, as the others were, on
the ground floor, looked out upon a little fresh green garden, shady and
impenetrable to the eyes of his neighbors.

With regard to d’Artagnan, we know how he was lodged, and we have
already made acquaintance with his lackey, Master Planchet.

D’Artagnan, who was by nature very curious--as people generally are who
possess the genius of intrigue--did all he could to make out who Athos,
Porthos, and Aramis really were (for under these pseudonyms each of
these young men concealed his family name)--Athos in particular, who, a
league away, savored of nobility. He addressed himself then to Porthos
to gain information respecting Athos and Aramis, and to Aramis in order
to learn something of Porthos.

Unfortunately Porthos knew nothing of the life of his silent companion
but what revealed itself. It was said Athos had met with great crosses
in love, and that a frightful treachery had forever poisoned the life of
this gallant man. What could this treachery be? All the world was
ignorant of it.

As to Porthos, except his real name (as was the case with those of his
two comrades), his life was very easily known. Vain and indiscreet, it
was as easy to see through him as through a crystal. The only thing to
mislead the investigator would have been belief in all the good things
he said of himself.

With respect to Aramis, though having the air of having nothing secret
about him, he was a young fellow made up of mysteries, answering little
to questions put to him about others, and having learned from him the
report which prevailed concerning the success of the Musketeer with a
princess, wished to gain a little insight into the amorous adventures of
his interlocutor. “And you, my dear companion,” said he, “you speak of
the baronesses, countesses, and princesses of others?”

“PARDIEU! I spoke of them because Porthos talked of them himself,
because he had paraded all these fine things before me. But be assured,
my dear Monsieur d’Artagnan, that if I had obtained them from any other
source, or if they had been confided to me, there exists no confessor
more discreet than myself.”

“Oh, I don’t doubt that,” replied d’Artagnan; “but it seems to me that
you are tolerably familiar with coats of arms--a certain embroidered
handkerchief, for instance, to which I owe the honor of your
acquaintance?”

This time Aramis was not angry, but assumed the most modest air and
replied in a friendly tone, “My dear friend, do not forget that I wish
to belong to the Church, and that I avoid all mundane opportunities. The
handkerchief you saw had not been given to me, but it had been forgotten
and left at my house by one of my friends. I was obliged to pick it up
in order not to compromise him and the lady he loves. As for myself, I
neither have, nor desire to have, a mistress, following in that respect
the very judicious example of Athos, who has none any more than I have.”

“But what the devil! You are not a priest, you are a Musketeer!”

“A Musketeer for a time, my friend, as the cardinal says, a Musketeer
against my will, but a churchman at heart, believe me. Athos and Porthos
dragged me into this to occupy me. I had, at the moment of being
ordained, a little difficulty with--But that would not interest you, and
I am taking up your valuable time.”

“Not at all; it interests me very much,” cried d’Artagnan; “and at this
moment I have absolutely nothing to do.”

“Yes, but I have my breviary to repeat,” answered Aramis; “then some
verses to compose, which Madame d’Aiguillon begged of me. Then I must go
to the Rue St. Honore in order to purchase some rouge for Madame de
Chevreuse. So you see, my dear friend, that if you are not in a hurry, I
am very much in a hurry.”

Aramis held out his hand in a cordial manner to his young companion, and
took leave of him.

Notwithstanding all the pains he took, d’Artagnan was unable to learn
any more concerning his three new-made friends. He formed, therefore,
the resolution of believing for the present all that was said of their
past, hoping for more certain and extended revelations in the future. In
the meanwhile, he looked upon Athos as an Achilles, Porthos as an Ajax,
and Aramis as a Joseph.

As to the rest, the life of the four young friends was joyous enough.
Athos played, and that as a rule unfortunately. Nevertheless, he never
borrowed a sou of his companions, although his purse was ever at their
service; and when he had played upon honor, he always awakened his
creditor by six o’clock the next morning to pay the debt of the
preceding evening.

Porthos had his fits. On the days when he won he was insolent and
ostentatious; if he lost, he disappeared completely for several days,
after which he reappeared with a pale face and thinner person, but with
money in his purse.

As to Aramis, he never played. He was the worst Musketeer and the most
unconvivial companion imaginable. He had always something or other to
do. Sometimes in the midst of dinner, when everyone, under the
attraction of wine and in the warmth of conversation, believed they had
two or three hours longer to enjoy themselves at table, Aramis looked at
his watch, arose with a bland smile, and took leave of the company, to
go, as he said, to consult a casuist with whom he had an appointment. At
other times he would return home to write a treatise, and requested his
friends not to disturb him.

At this Athos would smile, with his charming, melancholy smile, which so
became his noble countenance, and Porthos would drink, swearing that
Aramis would never be anything but a village CURE.

Planchet, d’Artagnan’s valet, supported his good fortune nobly. He
received thirty sous per day, and for a month he returned to his
lodgings gay as a chaffinch, and affable toward his master. When the
wind of adversity began to blow upon the housekeeping of the Rue des
Fossoyeurs--that is to say, when the forty pistoles of King Louis XIII
were consumed or nearly so--he commenced complaints which Athos thought
nauseous, Porthos indecent, and Aramis ridiculous. Athos counseled
d’Artagnan to dismiss the fellow; Porthos was of the opinion that he
should give him a good thrashing first; and Aramis contended that a
master should never attend to anything but the civilities paid to him.

“This is all very easy for you to say,” replied d’Artagnan, “for you,
Athos, who live like a dumb man with Grimaud, who forbid him to speak,
and consequently never exchange ill words with him; for you, Porthos,
who carry matters in such a magnificent style, and are a god to your
valet, Mousqueton; and for you, Aramis, who, always abstracted by your
theological studies, inspire your servant, Bazin, a mild, religious man,
with a profound respect; but for me, who am without any settled means
and without resources--for me, who am neither a Musketeer nor even a
Guardsman, what am I to do to inspire either the affection, the terror,
or the respect in Planchet?”

“This is serious,” answered the three friends; “it is a family affair.
It is with valets as with wives, they must be placed at once upon the
footing in which you wish them to remain. Reflect upon it.”

D’Artagnan did reflect, and resolved to thrash Planchet provisionally;
which he did with the conscientiousness that d’Artagnan carried into
everything. After having well beaten him, he forbade him to leave his
service without his permission. “For,” added he, “the future cannot fail
to mend; I inevitably look for better times. Your fortune is therefore
made if you remain with me, and I am too good a master to allow you to
miss such a chance by granting you the dismissal you require.”

This manner of acting roused much respect for d’Artagnan’s policy among
the Musketeers. Planchet was equally seized with admiration, and said no
more about going away.

The life of the four young men had become fraternal. D’Artagnan, who had
no settled habits of his own, as he came from his province into the
midst of a world quite new to him, fell easily into the habits of his
friends.

They rose about eight o’clock in the winter, about six in summer, and
went to take the countersign and see how things went on at M. de
Treville’s. D’Artagnan, although he was not a Musketeer, performed the
duty of one with remarkable punctuality. He went on guard because he
always kept company with whoever of his friends was on duty. He was well
known at the Hotel of the Musketeers, where everyone considered him a
good comrade. M. de Treville, who had appreciated him at the first
glance and who bore him a real affection, never ceased recommending him
to the king.

On their side, the three Musketeers were much attached to their young
comrade. The friendship which united these four men, and the need they
felt of seeing another three or four times a day, whether for dueling,
business, or pleasure, caused them to be continually running after one
another like shadows; and the Inseparables were constantly to be met
with seeking one another, from the Luxembourg to the Place St. Sulpice,
or from the Rue du Vieux-Colombier to the Luxembourg.

In the meanwhile the promises of M. de Treville went on prosperously.
One fine morning the king commanded M. de Chevalier Dessessart to admit
d’Artagnan as a cadet in his company of Guards. D’Artagnan, with a sigh,
donned his uniform, which he would have exchanged for that of a
Musketeer at the expense of ten years of his existence. But M. de
Treville promised this favor after a novitiate of two years--a novitiate
which might besides be abridged if an opportunity should present itself
for d’Artagnan to render the king any signal service, or to distinguish
himself by some brilliant action. Upon this promise d’Artagnan withdrew,
and the next day he began service.

Then it became the turn of Athos, Porthos, and Aramis to mount guard
with d’Artagnan when he was on duty. The company of M. le Chevalier
Dessessart thus received four instead of one when it admitted
d’Artagnan.




8 CONCERNING A COURT INTRIGUE


In the meantime, the forty pistoles of King Louis XIII, like all other
things of this world, after having had a beginning had an end, and after
this end our four companions began to be somewhat embarrassed. At first,
Athos supported the association for a time with his own means.

Porthos succeeded him; and thanks to one of those disappearances to
which he was accustomed, he was able to provide for the wants of all for
a fortnight. At last it became Aramis’s turn, who performed it with a
good grace and who succeeded--as he said, by selling some theological
books--in procuring a few pistoles.

Then, as they had been accustomed to do, they had recourse to M. de
Treville, who made some advances on their pay; but these advances could
not go far with three Musketeers who were already much in arrears and a
Guardsman who as yet had no pay at all.

At length when they found they were likely to be really in want, they
got together, as a last effort, eight or ten pistoles, with which
Porthos went to the gaming table. Unfortunately he was in a bad vein; he
lost all, together with twenty-five pistoles for which he had given his
word.

Then the inconvenience became distress. The hungry friends, followed by
their lackeys, were seen haunting the quays and Guard rooms, picking up
among their friends abroad all the dinners they could meet with; for
according to the advice of Aramis, it was prudent to sow repasts right
and left in prosperity, in order to reap a few in time of need.

Athos was invited four times, and each time took his friends and their
lackeys with him. Porthos had six occasions, and contrived in the same
manner that his friends should partake of them; Aramis had eight of
them. He was a man, as must have been already perceived, who made but
little noise, and yet was much sought after.

As to d’Artagnan, who as yet knew nobody in the capital, he only found
one chocolate breakfast at the house of a priest of his own province,
and one dinner at the house of a cornet of the Guards. He took his army
to the priest’s, where they devoured as much provision as would have
lasted him for two months, and to the cornet’s, who performed wonders;
but as Planchet said, “People do not eat at once for all time, even when
they eat a good deal.”

D’Artagnan thus felt himself humiliated in having only procured one meal
and a half for his companions--as the breakfast at the priest’s could
only be counted as half a repast--in return for the feasts which Athos,
Porthos, and Aramis had procured him. He fancied himself a burden to the
society, forgetting in his perfectly juvenile good faith that he had fed
this society for a month; and he set his mind actively to work. He
reflected that this coalition of four young, brave, enterprising, and
active men ought to have some other object than swaggering walks,
fencing lessons, and practical jokes, more or less witty.

In fact, four men such as they were--four men devoted to one another,
from their purses to their lives; four men always supporting one
another, never yielding, executing singly or together the resolutions
formed in common; four arms threatening the four cardinal points, or
turning toward a single point--must inevitably, either subterraneously,
in open day, by mining, in the trench, by cunning, or by force, open
themselves a way toward the object they wished to attain, however well
it might be defended, or however distant it may seem. The only thing
that astonished d’Artagnan was that his friends had never thought of
this.

He was thinking by himself, and even seriously racking his brain to find
a direction for this single force four times multiplied, with which he
did not doubt, as with the lever for which Archimedes sought, they
should succeed in moving the world, when someone tapped gently at his
door. D’Artagnan awakened Planchet and ordered him to open it.

From this phrase, “d’Artagnan awakened Planchet,” the reader must not
suppose it was night, or that day was hardly come. No, it had just
struck four. Planchet, two hours before, had asked his master for some
dinner, and he had answered him with the proverb, “He who sleeps,
dines.” And Planchet dined by sleeping.

A man was introduced of simple mien, who had the appearance of a
tradesman. Planchet, by way of dessert, would have liked to hear the
conversation; but the citizen declared to d’Artagnan that, what he had
to say being important and confidential, he desired to be left alone
with him.

D’Artagnan dismissed Planchet, and requested his visitor to be seated.
There was a moment of silence, during which the two men looked at each
other, as if to make a preliminary acquaintance, after which d’Artagnan
bowed, as a sign that he listened.

“I have heard Monsieur d’Artagnan spoken of as a very brave young man,”
said the citizen; “and this reputation which he justly enjoys had
decided me to confide a secret to him.”

“Speak, monsieur, speak,” said d’Artagnan, who instinctively scented
something advantageous.

The citizen made a fresh pause and continued, “I have a wife who is
seamstress to the queen, monsieur, and who is not deficient in either
virtue or beauty. I was induced to marry her about three years ago,
although she had but very little dowry, because Monsieur Laporte, the
queen’s cloak bearer, is her godfather, and befriends her.”

“Well, monsieur?” asked d’Artagnan.

“Well!” resumed the citizen, “well, monsieur, my wife was abducted
yesterday morning, as she was coming out of her workroom.”

“And by whom was your wife abducted?”

“I know nothing surely, monsieur, but I suspect someone.”

“And who is the person whom you suspect?”

“A man who has pursued her a long time.”

“The devil!”

“But allow me to tell you, monsieur,” continued the citizen, “that I am
convinced that there is less love than politics in all this.”

“Less love than politics,” replied d’Artagnan, with a reflective air;
“and what do you suspect?”

“I do not know whether I ought to tell you what I suspect.”

“Monsieur, I beg you to observe that I ask you absolutely nothing. It is
you who have come to me. It is you who have told me that you had a
secret to confide in me. Act, then, as you think proper; there is still
time to withdraw.”

“No, monsieur, no; you appear to be an honest young man, and I will have
confidence in you. I believe, then, that it is not on account of any
intrigues of her own that my wife has been arrested, but because of
those of a lady much greater than herself.”

“Ah, ah! Can it be on account of the amours of Madame de Bois-Tracy?”
said d’Artagnan, wishing to have the air, in the eyes of the citizen, of
being posted as to court affairs.

“Higher, monsieur, higher.”

“Of Madame d’Aiguillon?”

“Still higher.”

“Of Madame de Chevreuse?”

“Of the--” d’Artagnan checked himself.

“Yes, monsieur,” replied the terrified citizen, in a tone so low that he
was scarcely audible.

“And with whom?”

“With whom can it be, if not the Duke of--”

“The Duke of--”

“Yes, monsieur,” replied the citizen, giving a still fainter intonation
to his voice.

“But how do you know all this?”

“How do I know it?”

“Yes, how do you know it? No half-confidence, or--you understand!”

“I know it from my wife, monsieur--from my wife herself.”

“Who learns it from whom?”

“From Monsieur Laporte. Did I not tell you that she was the goddaughter
of Monsieur Laporte, the confidential man of the queen? Well, Monsieur
Laporte placed her near her Majesty in order that our poor queen might
at least have someone in whom she could place confidence, abandoned as
she is by the king, watched as she is by the cardinal, betrayed as she
is by everybody.”

“Ah, ah! It begins to develop itself,” said d’Artagnan.

“Now, my wife came home four days ago, monsieur. One of her conditions
was that she should come and see me twice a week; for, as I had the
honor to tell you, my wife loves me dearly--my wife, then, came and
confided to me that the queen at that very moment entertained great
fears.”

“Truly!”

“Yes. The cardinal, as it appears, pursues her and persecutes her more
than ever. He cannot pardon her the history of the Saraband. You know
the history of the Saraband?”

“PARDIEU! Know it!” replied d’Artagnan, who knew nothing about it, but
who wished to appear to know everything that was going on.

“So that now it is no longer hatred, but vengeance.”

“Indeed!”

“And the queen believes--”

“Well, what does the queen believe?”

“She believes that someone has written to the Duke of Buckingham in her
name.”

“In the queen’s name?”

“Yes, to make him come to Paris; and when once come to Paris, to draw
him into some snare.”

“The devil! But your wife, monsieur, what has she to do with all this?”

“Her devotion to the queen is known; and they wish either to remove her
from her mistress, or to intimidate her, in order to obtain her
Majesty’s secrets, or to seduce her and make use of her as a spy.”

“That is likely,” said d’Artagnan; “but the man who has abducted her--do
you know him?”

“I have told you that I believe I know him.”

“His name?”

“I do not know that; what I do know is that he is a creature of the
cardinal, his evil genius.”

“But you have seen him?”

“Yes, my wife pointed him out to me one day.”

“Has he anything remarkable about him by which one may recognize him?”

“Oh, certainly; he is a noble of very lofty carriage, black hair,
swarthy complexion, piercing eye, white teeth, and has a scar on his
temple.”

“A scar on his temple!” cried d’Artagnan; “and with that, white teeth, a
piercing eye, dark complexion, black hair, and haughty carriage--why,
that’s my man of Meung.”

“He is your man, do you say?”

“Yes, yes; but that has nothing to do with it. No, I am wrong. On the
contrary, that simplifies the matter greatly. If your man is mine, with
one blow I shall obtain two revenges, that’s all; but where to find this
man?”

“I know not.”

“Have you no information as to his abiding place?”

“None. One day, as I was conveying my wife back to the Louvre, he was
coming out as she was going in, and she showed him to me.”

“The devil! The devil!” murmured d’Artagnan; “all this is vague enough.
From whom have you learned of the abduction of your wife?”

“From Monsieur Laporte.”

“Did he give you any details?”

“He knew none himself.”

“And you have learned nothing from any other quarter?”

“Yes, I have received--”

“What?”

“I fear I am committing a great imprudence.”

“You always come back to that; but I must make you see this time that it
is too late to retreat.”

“I do not retreat, MORDIEU!” cried the citizen, swearing in order to
rouse his courage. “Besides, by the faith of Bonacieux--”

“You call yourself Bonacieux?” interrupted d’Artagnan.

“Yes, that is my name.”

“You said, then, by the word of Bonacieux. Pardon me for interrupting
you, but it appears to me that that name is familiar to me.”

“Possibly, monsieur. I am your landlord.”

“Ah, ah!” said d’Artagnan, half rising and bowing; “you are my
landlord?”

“Yes, monsieur, yes. And as it is three months since you have been here,
and though, distracted as you must be in your important occupations, you
have forgotten to pay me my rent--as, I say, I have not tormented you a
single instant, I thought you would appreciate my delicacy.”

“How can it be otherwise, my dear Bonacieux?” replied d’Artagnan; “trust
me, I am fully grateful for such unparalleled conduct, and if, as I told
you, I can be of any service to you--”

“I believe you, monsieur, I believe you; and as I was about to say, by
the word of Bonacieux, I have confidence in you.”

“Finish, then, what you were about to say.”

The citizen took a paper from his pocket, and presented it to
d’Artagnan.

“A letter?” said the young man.

“Which I received this morning.”

D’Artagnan opened it, and as the day was beginning to decline, he
approached the window to read it. The citizen followed him.

“‘Do not seek your wife,’” read d’Artagnan; “‘she will be restored to
you when there is no longer occasion for her. If you make a single step
to find her you are lost.’

“That’s pretty positive,” continued d’Artagnan; “but after all, it is
but a menace.”

“Yes; but that menace terrifies me. I am not a fighting man at all,
monsieur, and I am afraid of the Bastille.”

“Hum!” said d’Artagnan. “I have no greater regard for the Bastille than
you. If it were nothing but a sword thrust, why then--”

“I have counted upon you on this occasion, monsieur.”

“Yes?”

“Seeing you constantly surrounded by Musketeers of a very superb
appearance, and knowing that these Musketeers belong to Monsieur de
Treville, and were consequently enemies of the cardinal, I thought that
you and your friends, while rendering justice to your poor queen, would
be pleased to play his Eminence an ill turn.”

“Without doubt.”

“And then I have thought that considering three months’ lodging, about
which I have said nothing--”

“Yes, yes; you have already given me that reason, and I find it
excellent.”

“Reckoning still further, that as long as you do me the honor to remain
in my house I shall never speak to you about rent--”

“Very kind!”

“And adding to this, if there be need of it, meaning to offer you fifty
pistoles, if, against all probability, you should be short at the
present moment.”

“Admirable! You are rich then, my dear Monsieur Bonacieux?”

“I am comfortably off, monsieur, that’s all; I have scraped together
some such things as an income of two or three thousand crowns in the
haberdashery business, but more particularly in venturing some funds in
the last voyage of the celebrated navigator Jean Moquet; so that you
understand, monsieur--But!--” cried the citizen.

“What!” demanded d’Artagnan.

“Whom do I see yonder?”

“Where?”

“In the street, facing your window, in the embrasure of that door--a man
wrapped in a cloak.”

“It is he!” cried d’Artagnan and the citizen at the same time, each
having recognized his man.

“Ah, this time,” cried d’Artagnan, springing to his sword, “this time he
will not escape me!”

Drawing his sword from its scabbard, he rushed out of the apartment. On
the staircase he met Athos and Porthos, who were coming to see him. They
separated, and d’Artagnan rushed between them like a dart.

“Pah! Where are you going?” cried the two Musketeers in a breath.

“The man of Meung!” replied d’Artagnan, and disappeared.

D’Artagnan had more than once related to his friends his adventure with
the stranger, as well as the apparition of the beautiful foreigner, to
whom this man had confided some important missive.

The opinion of Athos was that d’Artagnan had lost his letter in the
skirmish. A gentleman, in his opinion--and according to d’Artagnan’s
portrait of him, the stranger must be a gentleman--would be incapable of
the baseness of stealing a letter.

Porthos saw nothing in all this but a love meeting, given by a lady to a
cavalier, or by a cavalier to a lady, which had been disturbed by the
presence of d’Artagnan and his yellow horse.

Aramis said that as these sorts of affairs were mysterious, it was
better not to fathom them.

They understood, then, from the few words which escaped from d’Artagnan,
what affair was in hand, and as they thought that overtaking his man, or
losing sight of him, d’Artagnan would return to his rooms, they kept on
their way.

When they entered d’Artagnan’s chamber, it was empty; the landlord,
dreading the consequences of the encounter which was doubtless about to
take place between the young man and the stranger, had, consistent with
the character he had given himself, judged it prudent to decamp.




9 D’ARTAGNAN SHOWS HIMSELF


As Athos and Porthos had foreseen, at the expiration of a half hour,
d’Artagnan returned. He had again missed his man, who had disappeared as
if by enchantment. D’Artagnan had run, sword in hand, through all the
neighboring streets, but had found nobody resembling the man he sought
for. Then he came back to the point where, perhaps, he ought to have
begun, and that was to knock at the door against which the stranger had
leaned; but this proved useless--for though he knocked ten or twelve
times in succession, no one answered, and some of the neighbors, who put
their noses out of their windows or were brought to their doors by the
noise, had assured him that that house, all the openings of which were
tightly closed, had not been inhabited for six months.

While d’Artagnan was running through the streets and knocking at doors,
Aramis had joined his companions; so that on returning home d’Artagnan
found the reunion complete.

“Well!” cried the three Musketeers all together, on seeing d’Artagnan
enter with his brow covered with perspiration and his countenance upset
with anger.

“Well!” cried he, throwing his sword upon the bed, “this man must be the
devil in person; he has disappeared like a phantom, like a shade, like a
specter.”

“Do you believe in apparitions?” asked Athos of Porthos.

“I never believe in anything I have not seen, and as I never have seen
apparitions, I don’t believe in them.”

“The Bible,” said Aramis, “makes our belief in them a law; the ghost of
Samuel appeared to Saul, and it is an article of faith that I should be
very sorry to see any doubt thrown upon, Porthos.”

“At all events, man or devil, body or shadow, illusion or reality, this
man is born for my damnation; for his flight has caused us to miss a
glorious affair, gentlemen--an affair by which there were a hundred
pistoles, and perhaps more, to be gained.”

“How is that?” cried Porthos and Aramis in a breath.

As to Athos, faithful to his system of reticence, he contented himself
with interrogating d’Artagnan by a look.

“Planchet,” said d’Artagnan to his domestic, who just then insinuated
his head through the half-open door in order to catch some fragments of
the conversation, “go down to my landlord, Monsieur Bonacieux, and ask
him to send me half a dozen bottles of Beaugency wine; I prefer that.”

“Ah, ah! You have credit with your landlord, then?” asked Porthos.

“Yes,” replied d’Artagnan, “from this very day; and mind, if the wine is
bad, we will send him to find better.”

“We must use, and not abuse,” said Aramis, sententiously.

“I always said that d’Artagnan had the longest head of the four,” said
Athos, who, having uttered his opinion, to which d’Artagnan replied with
a bow, immediately resumed his accustomed silence.

“But come, what is this about?” asked Porthos.

“Yes,” said Aramis, “impart it to us, my dear friend, unless the honor
of any lady be hazarded by this confidence; in that case you would do
better to keep it to yourself.”

“Be satisfied,” replied d’Artagnan; “the honor of no one will have cause
to complain of what I have to tell.”

He then related to his friends, word for word, all that had passed
between him and his host, and how the man who had abducted the wife of
his worthy landlord was the same with whom he had had the difference at
the hostelry of the Jolly Miller.

“Your affair is not bad,” said Athos, after having tasted like a
connoisseur and indicated by a nod of his head that he thought the wine
good; “and one may draw fifty or sixty pistoles from this good man. Then
there only remains to ascertain whether these fifty or sixty pistoles
are worth the risk of four heads.”

“But observe,” cried d’Artagnan, “that there is a woman in the affair--a
woman carried off, a woman who is doubtless threatened, tortured
perhaps, and all because she is faithful to her mistress.”

“Beware, d’Artagnan, beware,” said Aramis. “You grow a little too warm,
in my opinion, about the fate of Madame Bonacieux. Woman was created for
our destruction, and it is from her we inherit all our miseries.”

At this speech of Aramis, the brow of Athos became clouded and he bit
his lips.

“It is not Madame Bonacieux about whom I am anxious,” cried d’Artagnan,
“but the queen, whom the king abandons, whom the cardinal persecutes,
and who sees the heads of all her friends fall, one after the other.”

“Why does she love what we hate most in the world, the Spaniards and the
English?”

“Spain is her country,” replied d’Artagnan; “and it is very natural that
she should love the Spanish, who are the children of the same soil as
herself. As to the second reproach, I have heard it said that she does
not love the English, but an Englishman.”

“Well, and by my faith,” said Athos, “it must be acknowledged that this
Englishman is worthy of being loved. I never saw a man with a nobler air
than his.”

“Without reckoning that he dresses as nobody else can,” said Porthos. “I
was at the Louvre on the day when he scattered his pearls; and, PARDIEU,
I picked up two that I sold for ten pistoles each. Do you know him,
Aramis?”

“As well as you do, gentlemen; for I was among those who seized him in
the garden at Amiens, into which Monsieur Putange, the queen’s equerry,
introduced me. I was at school at the time, and the adventure appeared
to me to be cruel for the king.”

“Which would not prevent me,” said d’Artagnan, “if I knew where the Duke
of Buckingham was, from taking him by the hand and conducting him to the
queen, were it only to enrage the cardinal, and if we could find means
to play him a sharp turn, I vow that I would voluntarily risk my head in
doing it.”

“And did the mercer*,” rejoined Athos, “tell you, d’Artagnan, that the
queen thought that Buckingham had been brought over by a forged letter?”

    _*Haberdasher_

“She is afraid so.”

“Wait a minute, then,” said Aramis.

“What for?” demanded Porthos.

“Go on, while I endeavor to recall circumstances.”

“And now I am convinced,” said d’Artagnan, “that this abduction of the
queen’s woman is connected with the events of which we are speaking, and
perhaps with the presence of Buckingham in Paris.”

“The Gascon is full of ideas,” said Porthos, with admiration.

“I like to hear him talk,” said Athos; “his dialect amuses me.”

“Gentlemen,” cried Aramis, “listen to this.”

“Listen to Aramis,” said his three friends.

“Yesterday I was at the house of a doctor of theology, whom I sometimes
consult about my studies.”

Athos smiled.

“He resides in a quiet quarter,” continued Aramis; “his tastes and his
profession require it. Now, at the moment when I left his house--”

Here Aramis paused.

“Well,” cried his auditors; “at the moment you left his house?”

Aramis appeared to make a strong inward effort, like a man who, in the
full relation of a falsehood, finds himself stopped by some unforeseen
obstacle; but the eyes of his three companions were fixed upon him,
their ears were wide open, and there were no means of retreat.

“This doctor has a niece,” continued Aramis.

“Ah, he has a niece!” interrupted Porthos.

“A very respectable lady,” said Aramis.

The three friends burst into laughter.

“Ah, if you laugh, if you doubt me,” replied Aramis, “you shall know
nothing.”

“We believe like Mohammedans, and are as mute as tombstones,” said
Athos.

“I will continue, then,” resumed Aramis. “This niece comes sometimes to
see her uncle; and by chance was there yesterday at the same time that I
was, and it was my duty to offer to conduct her to her carriage.”

“Ah! She has a carriage, then, this niece of the doctor?” interrupted
Porthos, one of whose faults was a great looseness of tongue. “A nice
acquaintance, my friend!”

“Porthos,” replied Aramis, “I have had the occasion to observe to you
more than once that you are very indiscreet; and that is injurious to
you among the women.”

“Gentlemen, gentlemen,” cried d’Artagnan, who began to get a glimpse of
the result of the adventure, “the thing is serious. Let us try not to
jest, if we can. Go on Aramis, go on.”

“All at once, a tall, dark gentleman--just like yours, d’Artagnan.”

“The same, perhaps,” said he.

“Possibly,” continued Aramis, “came toward me, accompanied by five or
six men who followed about ten paces behind him; and in the politest
tone, ‘Monsieur Duke,’ said he to me, ‘and you madame,’ continued he,
addressing the lady on my arm--”

“The doctor’s niece?”

“Hold your tongue, Porthos,” said Athos; “you are insupportable.”

“‘--will you enter this carriage, and that without offering the least
resistance, without making the least noise?’”

“He took you for Buckingham!” cried d’Artagnan.

“I believe so,” replied Aramis.

“But the lady?” asked Porthos.

“He took her for the queen!” said d’Artagnan.

“Just so,” replied Aramis.

“The Gascon is the devil!” cried Athos; “nothing escapes him.”

“The fact is,” said Porthos, “Aramis is of the same height, and
something of the shape of the duke; but it nevertheless appears to me
that the dress of a Musketeer--”

“I wore an enormous cloak,” said Aramis.

“In the month of July? The devil!” said Porthos. “Is the doctor afraid
that you may be recognized?”

“I can comprehend that the spy may have been deceived by the person; but
the face--”

“I had a large hat,” said Aramis.

“Oh, good lord,” cried Porthos, “what precautions for the study of
theology!”

“Gentlemen, gentlemen,” said d’Artagnan, “do not let us lose our time in
jesting. Let us separate, and let us seek the mercer’s wife--that is the
key of the intrigue.”

“A woman of such inferior condition! Can you believe so?” said Porthos,
protruding his lips with contempt.

“She is goddaughter to Laporte, the confidential valet of the queen.
Have I not told you so, gentlemen? Besides, it has perhaps been her
Majesty’s calculation to seek on this occasion for support so lowly.
High heads expose themselves from afar, and the cardinal is
longsighted.”

“Well,” said Porthos, “in the first place make a bargain with the
mercer, and a good bargain.”

“That’s useless,” said d’Artagnan; “for I believe if he does not pay us,
we shall be well enough paid by another party.”

At this moment a sudden noise of footsteps was heard upon the stairs;
the door was thrown violently open, and the unfortunate mercer rushed
into the chamber in which the council was held.

“Save me, gentlemen, for the love of heaven, save me!” cried he. “There
are four men come to arrest me. Save me! Save me!”

Porthos and Aramis arose.

“A moment,” cried d’Artagnan, making them a sign to replace in the
scabbard their half-drawn swords. “It is not courage that is needed; it
is prudence.”

“And yet,” cried Porthos, “we will not leave--”

“You will leave d’Artagnan to act as he thinks proper,” said Athos. “He
has, I repeat, the longest head of the four, and for my part I declare
that I will obey him. Do as you think best, d’Artagnan.”

At this moment the four Guards appeared at the door of the antechamber,
but seeing four Musketeers standing, and their swords by their sides,
they hesitated about going farther.

“Come in, gentlemen, come in,” called d’Artagnan; “you are here in my
apartment, and we are all faithful servants of the king and cardinal.”

“Then, gentlemen, you will not oppose our executing the orders we have
received?” asked one who appeared to be the leader of the party.

“On the contrary, gentlemen, we would assist you if it were necessary.”

“What does he say?” grumbled Porthos.

“You are a simpleton,” said Athos. “Silence!”

“But you promised me--” whispered the poor mercer.

“We can only save you by being free ourselves,” replied d’Artagnan, in a
rapid, low tone; “and if we appear inclined to defend you, they will
arrest us with you.”

“It seems, nevertheless--”

“Come, gentlemen, come!” said d’Artagnan, aloud; “I have no motive for
defending Monsieur. I saw him today for the first time, and he can tell
you on what occasion; he came to demand the rent of my lodging. Is that
not true, Monsieur Bonacieux? Answer!”

“That is the very truth,” cried the mercer; “but Monsieur does not tell
you--”

“Silence, with respect to me, silence, with respect to my friends;
silence about the queen, above all, or you will ruin everybody without
saving yourself! Come, come, gentlemen, remove the fellow.” And
d’Artagnan pushed the half-stupefied mercer among the Guards, saying to
him, “You are a shabby old fellow, my dear. You come to demand money of
me--of a Musketeer! To prison with him! Gentlemen, once more, take him
to prison, and keep him under key as long as possible; that will give me
time to pay him.”

The officers were full of thanks, and took away their prey. As they were
going down d’Artagnan laid his hand on the shoulder of their leader.

“May I not drink to your health, and you to mine?” said d’Artagnan,
filling two glasses with the Beaugency wine which he had obtained from
the liberality of M. Bonacieux.

“That will do me great honor,” said the leader of the posse, “and I
accept thankfully.”

“Then to yours, monsieur--what is your name?”

“Boisrenard.”

“Monsieur Boisrenard.”

“To yours, my gentlemen! What is your name, in your turn, if you
please?”

“d’Artagnan.”

“To yours, monsieur.”

“And above all others,” cried d’Artagnan, as if carried away by his
enthusiasm, “to that of the king and the cardinal.”

The leader of the posse would perhaps have doubted the sincerity of
d’Artagnan if the wine had been bad; but the wine was good, and he was
convinced.

“What diabolical villainy you have performed here,” said Porthos, when
the officer had rejoined his companions and the four friends found
themselves alone. “Shame, shame, for four Musketeers to allow an
unfortunate fellow who cried for help to be arrested in their midst! And
a gentleman to hobnob with a bailiff!”

“Porthos,” said Aramis, “Athos has already told you that you are a
simpleton, and I am quite of his opinion. D’Artagnan, you are a great
man; and when you occupy Monsieur de Treville’s place, I will come and
ask your influence to secure me an abbey.”

“Well, I am in a maze,” said Porthos; “do YOU approve of what d’Artagnan
has done?”

“PARBLEU! Indeed I do,” said Athos; “I not only approve of what he has
done, but I congratulate him upon it.”

“And now, gentlemen,” said d’Artagnan, without stopping to explain his
conduct to Porthos, “All for one, one for all--that is our motto, is it
not?”

“And yet--” said Porthos.

“Hold out your hand and swear!” cried Athos and Aramis at once.

Overcome by example, grumbling to himself, nevertheless, Porthos
stretched out his hand, and the four friends repeated with one voice the
formula dictated by d’Artagnan:

“All for one, one for all.”

“That’s well! Now let us everyone retire to his own home,” said
d’Artagnan, as if he had done nothing but command all his life; “and
attention! For from this moment we are at feud with the cardinal.”




10 A MOUSETRAP IN THE SEVENTEENTH CENTURY


The invention of the mousetrap does not date from our days; as soon as
societies, in forming, had invented any kind of police, that police
invented mousetraps.

As perhaps our readers are not familiar with the slang of the Rue de
Jerusalem, and as it is fifteen years since we applied this word for the
first time to this thing, allow us to explain to them what is a
mousetrap.

When in a house, of whatever kind it may be, an individual suspected of
any crime is arrested, the arrest is held secret. Four or five men are
placed in ambuscade in the first room. The door is opened to all who
knock. It is closed after them, and they are arrested; so that at the
end of two or three days they have in their power almost all the
HABITUES of the establishment. And that is a mousetrap.

The apartment of M. Bonacieux, then, became a mousetrap; and whoever
appeared there was taken and interrogated by the cardinal’s people. It
must be observed that as a separate passage led to the first floor, in
which d’Artagnan lodged, those who called on him were exempted from this
detention.

Besides, nobody came thither but the three Musketeers; they had all been
engaged in earnest search and inquiries, but had discovered nothing.
Athos had even gone so far as to question M. de Treville--a thing which,
considering the habitual reticence of the worthy Musketeer, had very
much astonished his captain. But M. de Treville knew nothing, except
that the last time he had seen the cardinal, the king, and the queen,
the cardinal looked very thoughtful, the king uneasy, and the redness of
the queen’s eyes donated that she had been sleepless or tearful. But
this last circumstance was not striking, as the queen since her marriage
had slept badly and wept much.

M de Treville requested Athos, whatever might happen, to be observant of
his duty to the king, but particularly to the queen, begging him to
convey his desires to his comrades.

As to d’Artagnan, he did not budge from his apartment. He converted his
chamber into an observatory. From his windows he saw all the visitors
who were caught. Then, having removed a plank from his floor, and
nothing remaining but a simple ceiling between him and the room beneath,
in which the interrogatories were made, he heard all that passed between
the inquisitors and the accused.

The interrogatories, preceded by a minute search operated upon the
persons arrested, were almost always framed thus: “Has Madame Bonacieux
sent anything to you for her husband, or any other person? Has Monsieur
Bonacieux sent anything to you for his wife, or for any other person?
Has either of them confided anything to you by word of mouth?”

“If they knew anything, they would not question people in this manner,”
said d’Artagnan to himself. “Now, what is it they want to know? Why,
they want to know if the Duke of Buckingham is in Paris, and if he has
had, or is likely to have, an interview with the queen.”

D’Artagnan held onto this idea, which, from what he had heard, was not
wanting in probability.

In the meantime, the mousetrap continued in operation, and likewise
d’Artagnan’s vigilance.

On the evening of the day after the arrest of poor Bonacieux, as Athos
had just left d’Artagnan to report at M. de Treville’s, as nine o’clock
had just struck, and as Planchet, who had not yet made the bed, was
beginning his task, a knocking was heard at the street door. The door
was instantly opened and shut; someone was taken in the mousetrap.

D’Artagnan flew to his hole, laid himself down on the floor at full
length, and listened.

Cries were soon heard, and then moans, which someone appeared to be
endeavoring to stifle. There were no questions.

“The devil!” said d’Artagnan to himself. “It seems like a woman! They
search her; she resists; they use force--the scoundrels!”

In spite of his prudence, d’Artagnan restrained himself with great
difficulty from taking a part in the scene that was going on below.

“But I tell you that I am the mistress of the house, gentlemen! I tell
you I am Madame Bonacieux; I tell you I belong to the queen!” cried the
unfortunate woman.

“Madame Bonacieux!” murmured d’Artagnan. “Can I be so lucky as to find
what everybody is seeking for?”

The voice became more and more indistinct; a tumultuous movement shook
the partition. The victim resisted as much as a woman could resist four
men.

“Pardon, gentlemen--par--” murmured the voice, which could now only be
heard in inarticulate sounds.

“They are binding her; they are going to drag her away,” cried
d’Artagnan to himself, springing up from the floor. “My sword! Good, it
is by my side! Planchet!”

“Monsieur.”

“Run and seek Athos, Porthos and Aramis. One of the three will certainly
be at home, perhaps all three. Tell them to take arms, to come here, and
to run! Ah, I remember, Athos is at Monsieur de Treville’s.”

“But where are you going, monsieur, where are you going?”

“I am going down by the window, in order to be there the sooner,” cried
d’Artagnan. “You put back the boards, sweep the floor, go out at the
door, and run as I told you.”

“Oh, monsieur! Monsieur! You will kill yourself,” cried Planchet.

“Hold your tongue, stupid fellow,” said d’Artagnan; and laying hold of
the casement, he let himself gently down from the first story, which
fortunately was not very elevated, without doing himself the slightest
injury.

He then went straight to the door and knocked, murmuring, “I will go
myself and be caught in the mousetrap, but woe be to the cats that shall
pounce upon such a mouse!”

The knocker had scarcely sounded under the hand of the young man before
the tumult ceased, steps approached, the door was opened, and
d’Artagnan, sword in hand, rushed into the rooms of M. Bonacieux, the
door of which, doubtless acted upon by a spring, closed after him.

Then those who dwelt in Bonacieux’s unfortunate house, together with the
nearest neighbors, heard loud cries, stamping of feet, clashing of
swords, and breaking of furniture. A moment after, those who, surprised
by this tumult, had gone to their windows to learn the cause of it, saw
the door open, and four men, clothed in black, not COME out of it, but
FLY, like so many frightened crows, leaving on the ground and on the
corners of the furniture, feathers from their wings; that is to say,
patches of their clothes and fragments of their cloaks.

D’Artagnan was conqueror--without much effort, it must be confessed, for
only one of the officers was armed, and even he defended himself for
form’s sake. It is true that the three others had endeavored to knock
the young man down with chairs, stools, and crockery; but two or three
scratches made by the Gascon’s blade terrified them. Ten minutes
sufficed for their defeat, and d’Artagnan remained master of the field
of battle.

The neighbors who had opened their windows, with the coolness peculiar
to the inhabitants of Paris in these times of perpetual riots and
disturbances, closed them again as soon as they saw the four men in
black flee--their instinct telling them that for the time all was over.
Besides, it began to grow late, and then, as today, people went to bed
early in the quarter of the Luxembourg.

On being left alone with Mme. Bonacieux, d’Artagnan turned toward her;
the poor woman reclined where she had been left, half-fainting upon an
armchair. D’Artagnan examined her with a rapid glance.

She was a charming woman of twenty-five or twenty-six years, with dark
hair, blue eyes, and a nose slightly turned up, admirable teeth, and a
complexion marbled with rose and opal. There, however, ended the signs
which might have confounded her with a lady of rank. The hands were
white, but without delicacy; the feet did not bespeak the woman of
quality. Happily, d’Artagnan was not yet acquainted with such niceties.

While d’Artagnan was examining Mme. Bonacieux, and was, as we have said,
close to her, he saw on the ground a fine cambric handkerchief, which he
picked up, as was his habit, and at the corner of which he recognized
the same cipher he had seen on the handkerchief which had nearly caused
him and Aramis to cut each other’s throat.

From that time, d’Artagnan had been cautious with respect to
handkerchiefs with arms on them, and he therefore placed in the pocket
of Mme. Bonacieux the one he had just picked up.

At that moment Mme. Bonacieux recovered her senses. She opened her eyes,
looked around her with terror, saw that the apartment was empty and that
she was alone with her liberator. She extended her hands to him with a
smile. Mme. Bonacieux had the sweetest smile in the world.

“Ah, monsieur!” said she, “you have saved me; permit me to thank you.”

“Madame,” said d’Artagnan, “I have only done what every gentleman would
have done in my place; you owe me no thanks.”

“Oh, yes, monsieur, oh, yes; and I hope to prove to you that you have
not served an ingrate. But what could these men, whom I at first took
for robbers, want with me, and why is Monsieur Bonacieux not here?”

“Madame, those men were more dangerous than any robbers could have been,
for they are the agents of the cardinal; and as to your husband,
Monsieur Bonacieux, he is not here because he was yesterday evening
conducted to the Bastille.”

“My husband in the Bastille!” cried Mme. Bonacieux. “Oh, my God! What
has he done? Poor dear man, he is innocence itself!”

And something like a faint smile lighted the still-terrified features of
the young woman.

“What has he done, madame?” said d’Artagnan. “I believe that his only
crime is to have at the same time the good fortune and the misfortune to
be your husband.”

“But, monsieur, you know then--”

“I know that you have been abducted, madame.”

“And by whom? Do you know him? Oh, if you know him, tell me!”

“By a man of from forty to forty-five years, with black hair, a dark
complexion, and a scar on his left temple.”

“That is he, that is he; but his name?”

“Ah, his name? I do not know that.”

“And did my husband know I had been carried off?”

“He was informed of it by a letter, written to him by the abductor
himself.”

“And does he suspect,” said Mme. Bonacieux, with some embarrassment,
“the cause of this event?”

“He attributed it, I believe, to a political cause.”

“I doubted from the first; and now I think entirely as he does. Then my
dear Monsieur Bonacieux has not suspected me a single instant?”

“So far from it, madame, he was too proud of your prudence, and above
all, of your love.”

A second smile, almost imperceptible, stole over the rosy lips of the
pretty young woman.

“But,” continued d’Artagnan, “how did you escape?”

“I took advantage of a moment when they left me alone; and as I had
known since morning the reason of my abduction, with the help of the
sheets I let myself down from the window. Then, as I believed my husband
would be at home, I hastened hither.”

“To place yourself under his protection?”

“Oh, no, poor dear man! I knew very well that he was incapable of
defending me; but as he could serve us in other ways, I wished to inform
him.”

“Of what?”

“Oh, that is not my secret; I must not, therefore, tell you.”

“Besides,” said d’Artagnan, “pardon me, madame, if, guardsman as I am, I
remind you of prudence--besides, I believe we are not here in a very
proper place for imparting confidences. The men I have put to flight
will return reinforced; if they find us here, we are lost. I have sent
for three of my friends, but who knows whether they were at home?”

“Yes, yes! You are right,” cried the affrighted Mme. Bonacieux; “let us
fly! Let us save ourselves.”

At these words she passed her arm under that of d’Artagnan, and urged
him forward eagerly.

“But whither shall we fly--whither escape?”

“Let us first withdraw from this house; afterward we shall see.”

The young woman and the young man, without taking the trouble to shut
the door after them, descended the Rue des Fossoyeurs rapidly, turned
into the Rue des Fosses-Monsieur-le-Prince, and did not stop till they
came to the Place St. Sulpice.

“And now what are we to do, and where do you wish me to conduct you?”
asked d’Artagnan.

“I am at quite a loss how to answer you, I admit,” said Mme. Bonacieux.
“My intention was to inform Monsieur Laporte, through my husband, in
order that Monsieur Laporte might tell us precisely what had taken place
at the Louvre in the last three days, and whether there is any danger in
presenting myself there.”

“But I,” said d’Artagnan, “can go and inform Monsieur Laporte.”

“No doubt you could, only there is one misfortune, and that is that
Monsieur Bonacieux is known at the Louvre, and would be allowed to pass;
whereas you are not known there, and the gate would be closed against
you.”

“Ah, bah!” said d’Artagnan; “you have at some wicket of the Louvre a
CONCIERGE who is devoted to you, and who, thanks to a password, would--”

Mme. Bonacieux looked earnestly at the young man.

“And if I give you this password,” said she, “would you forget it as
soon as you used it?”

“By my honor, by the faith of a gentleman!” said d’Artagnan, with an
accent so truthful that no one could mistake it.

“Then I believe you. You appear to be a brave young man; besides, your
fortune may perhaps be the result of your devotedness.”

“I will do, without a promise and voluntarily, all that I can do to
serve the king and be agreeable to the queen. Dispose of me, then, as a
friend.”

“But I--where shall I go meanwhile?”

“Is there nobody from whose house Monsieur Laporte can come and fetch
you?”

“No, I can trust nobody.”

“Stop,” said d’Artagnan; “we are near Athos’s door. Yes, here it is.”

“Who is this Athos?”

“One of my friends.”

“But if he should be at home and see me?”

“He is not at home, and I will carry away the key, after having placed
you in his apartment.”

“But if he should return?”

“Oh, he won’t return; and if he should, he will be told that I have
brought a woman with me, and that woman is in his apartment.”

“But that will compromise me sadly, you know.”

“Of what consequence? Nobody knows you. Besides, we are in a situation
to overlook ceremony.”

“Come, then, let us go to your friend’s house. Where does he live?”

“Rue Ferou, two steps from here.”

“Let us go!”

Both resumed their way. As d’Artagnan had foreseen, Athos was not
within. He took the key, which was customarily given him as one of the
family, ascended the stairs, and introduced Mme. Bonacieux into the
little apartment of which we have given a description.

“You are at home,” said he. “Remain here, fasten the door inside, and
open it to nobody unless you hear three taps like this;” and he tapped
thrice--two taps close together and pretty hard, the other after an
interval, and lighter.

“That is well,” said Mme. Bonacieux. “Now, in my turn, let me give you
my instructions.”

“I am all attention.”

“Present yourself at the wicket of the Louvre, on the side of the Rue de
l’Echelle, and ask for Germain.”

“Well, and then?”

“He will ask you what you want, and you will answer by these two words,
‘Tours’ and ‘Bruxelles.’ He will at once put himself at your orders.”

“And what shall I command him?”

“To go and fetch Monsieur Laporte, the queen’s VALET DE CHAMBRE.”

“And when he shall have informed him, and Monsieur Laporte is come?”

“You will send him to me.”

“That is well; but where and how shall I see you again?”

“Do you wish to see me again?”

“Certainly.”

“Well, let that care be mine, and be at ease.”

“I depend upon your word.”

“You may.”

D’Artagnan bowed to Mme. Bonacieux, darting at her the most loving
glance that he could possibly concentrate upon her charming little
person; and while he descended the stairs, he heard the door closed and
double-locked. In two bounds he was at the Louvre; as he entered the
wicket of L’Echelle, ten o’clock struck. All the events we have
described had taken place within a half hour.

Everything fell out as Mme. Bonacieux prophesied. On hearing the
password, Germain bowed. In a few minutes, Laporte was at the lodge; in
two words d’Artagnan informed him where Mme. Bonacieux was. Laporte
assured himself, by having it twice repeated, of the accurate address,
and set off at a run. Hardly, however, had he taken ten steps before he
returned.

“Young man,” said he to d’Artagnan, “a suggestion.”

“What?”

“You may get into trouble by what has taken place.”

“You believe so?”

“Yes. Have you any friend whose clock is too slow?”

“Well?”

“Go and call upon him, in order that he may give evidence of your having
been with him at half past nine. In a court of justice that is called an
alibi.”

D’Artagnan found his advice prudent. He took to his heels, and was soon
at M. de Treville’s; but instead of going into the saloon with the rest
of the crowd, he asked to be introduced to M. de Treville’s office. As
d’Artagnan so constantly frequented the hotel, no difficulty was made in
complying with his request, and a servant went to inform M. de Treville
that his young compatriot, having something important to communicate,
solicited a private audience. Five minutes after, M. de Treville was
asking d’Artagnan what he could do to serve him, and what caused his
visit at so late an hour.

“Pardon me, monsieur,” said d’Artagnan, who had profited by the moment
he had been left alone to put back M. de Treville’s clock three-quarters
of an hour, “but I thought, as it was yet only twenty-five minutes past
nine, it was not too late to wait upon you.”

“Twenty-five minutes past nine!” cried M. de Treville, looking at the
clock; “why, that’s impossible!”

“Look, rather, monsieur,” said d’Artagnan, “the clock shows it.”

“That’s true,” said M. de Treville; “I believed it later. But what can I
do for you?”

Then d’Artagnan told M. de Treville a long history about the queen. He
expressed to him the fears he entertained with respect to her Majesty;
he related to him what he had heard of the projects of the cardinal with
regard to Buckingham, and all with a tranquillity and candor of which M.
de Treville was the more the dupe, from having himself, as we have said,
observed something fresh between the cardinal, the king, and the queen.

As ten o’clock was striking, d’Artagnan left M. de Treville, who thanked
him for his information, recommended him to have the service of the king
and queen always at heart, and returned to the saloon; but at the foot
of the stairs, d’Artagnan remembered he had forgotten his cane. He
consequently sprang up again, re-entered the office, with a turn of his
finger set the clock right again, that it might not be perceived the
next day that it had been put wrong, and certain from that time that he
had a witness to prove his alibi, he ran downstairs and soon found
himself in the street.




11 IN WHICH THE PLOT THICKENS


His visit to M. de Treville being paid, the pensive d’Artagnan took the
longest way homeward.

On what was d’Artagnan thinking, that he strayed thus from his path,
gazing at the stars of heaven, and sometimes sighing, sometimes smiling?

He was thinking of Mme. Bonacieux. For an apprentice Musketeer the young
woman was almost an ideal of love. Pretty, mysterious, initiated in
almost all the secrets of the court, which reflected such a charming
gravity over her pleasing features, it might be surmised that she was
not wholly unmoved; and this is an irresistible charm to novices in
love. Moreover, d’Artagnan had delivered her from the hands of the
demons who wished to search and ill treat her; and this important
service had established between them one of those sentiments of
gratitude which so easily assume a more tender character.

D’Artagnan already fancied himself, so rapid is the flight of our dreams
upon the wings of imagination, accosted by a messenger from the young
woman, who brought him some billet appointing a meeting, a gold chain,
or a diamond. We have observed that young cavaliers received presents
from their king without shame. Let us add that in these times of lax
morality they had no more delicacy with respect to the mistresses; and
that the latter almost always left them valuable and durable
remembrances, as if they essayed to conquer the fragility of their
sentiments by the solidity of their gifts.

Without a blush, men made their way in the world by the means of women
blushing. Such as were only beautiful gave their beauty, whence, without
doubt, comes the proverb, “The most beautiful girl in the world can only
give what she has.” Such as were rich gave in addition a part of their
money; and a vast number of heroes of that gallant period may be cited
who would neither have won their spurs in the first place, nor their
battles afterward, without the purse, more or less furnished, which
their mistress fastened to the saddle bow.

D’Artagnan owned nothing. Provincial diffidence, that slight varnish,
the ephemeral flower, that down of the peach, had evaporated to the
winds through the little orthodox counsels which the three Musketeers
gave their friend. D’Artagnan, following the strange custom of the
times, considered himself at Paris as on a campaign, neither more nor
less than if he had been in Flanders--Spain yonder, woman here. In each
there was an enemy to contend with, and contributions to be levied.

But, we must say, at the present moment d’Artagnan was ruled by a
feeling much more noble and disinterested. The mercer had said that he
was rich; the young man might easily guess that with so weak a man as M.
Bonacieux; and interest was almost foreign to this commencement of love,
which had been the consequence of it. We say ALMOST, for the idea that a
young, handsome, kind, and witty woman is at the same time rich takes
nothing from the beginning of love, but on the contrary strengthens it.

There are in affluence a crowd of aristocratic cares and caprices which
are highly becoming to beauty. A fine and white stocking, a silken robe,
a lace kerchief, a pretty slipper on the foot, a tasty ribbon on the
head do not make an ugly woman pretty, but they make a pretty woman
beautiful, without reckoning the hands, which gain by all this; the
hands, among women particularly, to be beautiful must be idle.

Then d’Artagnan, as the reader, from whom we have not concealed the
state of his fortune, very well knows--d’Artagnan was not a millionaire;
he hoped to become one someday, but the time which in his own mind he
fixed upon for this happy change was still far distant. In the
meanwhile, how disheartening to see the woman one loves long for those
thousands of nothings which constitute a woman’s happiness, and be
unable to give her those thousands of nothings. At least, when the woman
is rich and the lover is not, that which he cannot offer she offers to
herself; and although it is generally with her husband’s money that she
procures herself this indulgence, the gratitude for it seldom reverts to
him.

Then d’Artagnan, disposed to become the most tender of lovers, was at
the same time a very devoted friend. In the midst of his amorous
projects for the mercer’s wife, he did not forget his friends. The
pretty Mme. Bonacieux was just the woman to walk with in the Plain St.
Denis or in the fair of St. Germain, in company with Athos, Porthos, and
Aramis, to whom d’Artagnan had often remarked this. Then one could enjoy
charming little dinners, where one touches on one side the hand of a
friend, and on the other the foot of a mistress. Besides, on pressing
occasions, in extreme difficulties, d’Artagnan would become the
preserver of his friends.

And M. Bonacieux, whom d’Artagnan had pushed into the hands of the
officers, denying him aloud although he had promised in a whisper to
save him? We are compelled to admit to our readers that d’Artagnan
thought nothing about him in any way; or that if he did think of him, it
was only to say to himself that he was very well where he was, wherever
it might be. Love is the most selfish of all the passions.

Let our readers reassure themselves. If d’Artagnan forgets his host, or
appears to forget him, under the pretense of not knowing where he has
been carried, we will not forget him, and we know where he is. But for
the moment, let us do as did the amorous Gascon; we will see after the
worthy mercer later.

D’Artagnan, reflecting on his future amours, addressing himself to the
beautiful night, and smiling at the stars, ascended the Rue
Cherish-Midi, or Chase-Midi, as it was then called. As he found himself
in the quarter in which Aramis lived, he took it into his head to pay
his friend a visit in order to explain the motives which had led him to
send Planchet with a request that he would come instantly to the
mousetrap. Now, if Aramis had been at home when Planchet came to his
abode, he had doubtless hastened to the Rue des Fossoyeurs, and finding
nobody there but his other two companions perhaps, they would not be
able to conceive what all this meant. This mystery required an
explanation; at least, so d’Artagnan declared to himself.

He likewise thought this was an opportunity for talking about pretty
little Mme. Bonacieux, of whom his head, if not his heart, was already
full. We must never look for discretion in first love. First love is
accompanied by such excessive joy that unless the joy be allowed to
overflow, it will stifle you.

Paris for two hours past had been dark, and seemed a desert. Eleven
o’clock sounded from all the clocks of the Faubourg St. Germain. It was
delightful weather. D’Artagnan was passing along a lane on the spot
where the Rue d’Assas is now situated, breathing the balmy emanations
which were borne upon the wind from the Rue de Vaugirard, and which
arose from the gardens refreshed by the dews of evening and the breeze
of night. From a distance resounded, deadened, however, by good
shutters, the songs of the tipplers, enjoying themselves in the cabarets
scattered along the plain. Arrived at the end of the lane, d’Artagnan
turned to the left. The house in which Aramis dwelt was situated between
the Rue Cassette and the Rue Servandoni.

D’Artagnan had just passed the Rue Cassette, and already perceived the
door of his friend’s house, shaded by a mass of sycamores and clematis
which formed a vast arch opposite the front of it, when he perceived
something like a shadow issuing from the Rue Servandoni. This something
was enveloped in a cloak, and d’Artagnan at first believed it was a man;
but by the smallness of the form, the hesitation of the walk, and the
indecision of the step, he soon discovered that it was a woman. Further,
this woman, as if not certain of the house she was seeking, lifted up
her eyes to look around her, stopped, went backward, and then returned
again. D’Artagnan was perplexed.

“Shall I go and offer her my services?” thought he. “By her step she
must be young; perhaps she is pretty. Oh, yes! But a woman who wanders
in the streets at this hour only ventures out to meet her lover. If I
should disturb a rendezvous, that would not be the best means of
commencing an acquaintance.”

Meantime the young woman continued to advance, counting the houses and
windows. This was neither long nor difficult. There were but three
hotels in this part of the street; and only two windows looking toward
the road, one of which was in a pavilion parallel to that which Aramis
occupied, the other belonging to Aramis himself.

“PARIDIEU!” said d’Artagnan to himself, to whose mind the niece of the
theologian reverted, “PARDIEU, it would be droll if this belated dove
should be in search of our friend’s house. But on my soul, it looks so.
Ah, my dear Aramis, this time I shall find you out.” And d’Artagnan,
making himself as small as he could, concealed himself in the darkest
side of the street near a stone bench placed at the back of a niche.

The young woman continued to advance; and in addition to the lightness
of her step, which had betrayed her, she emitted a little cough which
denoted a sweet voice. D’Artagnan believed this cough to be a signal.

Nevertheless, whether the cough had been answered by a similar signal
which had fixed the irresolution of the nocturnal seeker, or whether
without this aid she saw that she had arrived at the end of her journey,
she resolutely drew near to Aramis’s shutter, and tapped, at three equal
intervals, with her bent finger.

“This is all very fine, dear Aramis,” murmured d’Artagnan. “Ah, Monsieur
Hypocrite, I understand how you study theology.”

The three blows were scarcely struck, when the inside blind was opened
and a light appeared through the panes of the outside shutter.

“Ah, ah!” said the listener, “not through doors, but through windows!
Ah, this visit was expected. We shall see the windows open, and the lady
enter by escalade. Very pretty!”

But to the great astonishment of d’Artagnan, the shutter remained
closed. Still more, the light which had shone for an instant
disappeared, and all was again in obscurity.

D’Artagnan thought this could not last long, and continued to look with
all his eyes and listen with all his ears.

He was right; at the end of some seconds two sharp taps were heard
inside. The young woman in the street replied by a single tap, and the
shutter was opened a little way.

It may be judged whether d’Artagnan looked or listened with avidity.
Unfortunately the light had been removed into another chamber; but the
eyes of the young man were accustomed to the night. Besides, the eyes of
the Gascons have, as it is asserted, like those of cats, the faculty of
seeing in the dark.

D’Artagnan then saw that the young woman took from her pocket a white
object, which she unfolded quickly, and which took the form of a
handkerchief. She made her interlocutor observe the corner of this
unfolded object.

This immediately recalled to d’Artagnan’s mind the handkerchief which he
had found at the feet of Mme. Bonacieux, which had reminded him of that
which he had dragged from under the feet of Aramis.

“What the devil could that handkerchief signify?”

Placed where he was, d’Artagnan could not perceive the face of Aramis.
We say Aramis, because the young man entertained no doubt that it was
his friend who held this dialogue from the interior with the lady of the
exterior. Curiosity prevailed over prudence; and profiting by the
preoccupation into which the sight of the handkerchief appeared to have
plunged the two personages now on the scene, he stole from his hiding
place, and quick as lightning, but stepping with utmost caution, he ran
and placed himself close to the angle of the wall, from which his eye
could pierce the interior of Aramis’s room.

Upon gaining this advantage d’Artagnan was near uttering a cry of
surprise; it was not Aramis who was conversing with the nocturnal
visitor, it was a woman! D’Artagnan, however, could only see enough to
recognize the form of her vestments, not enough to distinguish her
features.

At the same instant the woman inside drew a second handkerchief from her
pocket, and exchanged it for that which had just been shown to her. Then
some words were spoken by the two women. At length the shutter closed.
The woman who was outside the window turned round, and passed within
four steps of d’Artagnan, pulling down the hood of her mantle; but the
precaution was too late, d’Artagnan had already recognized Mme.
Bonacieux.

Mme. Bonacieux! The suspicion that it was she had crossed the mind of
d’Artagnan when she drew the handkerchief from her pocket; but what
probability was there that Mme. Bonacieux, who had sent for M. Laporte
in order to be reconducted to the Louvre, should be running about the
streets of Paris at half past eleven at night, at the risk of being
abducted a second time?

This must be, then, an affair of importance; and what is the most
important affair to a woman of twenty-five! Love.

But was it on her own account, or on account of another, that she
exposed herself to such hazards? This was a question the young man asked
himself, whom the demon of jealousy already gnawed, being in heart
neither more nor less than an accepted lover.

There was a very simple means of satisfying himself whither Mme.
Bonacieux was going; that was to follow her. This method was so simple
that d’Artagnan employed it quite naturally and instinctively.

But at the sight of the young man, who detached himself from the wall
like a statue walking from its niche, and at the noise of the steps
which she heard resound behind her, Mme. Bonacieux uttered a little cry
and fled.

D’Artagnan ran after her. It was not difficult for him to overtake a
woman embarrassed with her cloak. He came up with her before she had
traversed a third of the street. The unfortunate woman was exhausted,
not by fatigue, but by terror, and when d’Artagnan placed his hand upon
her shoulder, she sank upon one knee, crying in a choking voice, “Kill
me, if you please, you shall know nothing!”

D’Artagnan raised her by passing his arm round her waist; but as he felt
by her weight she was on the point of fainting, he made haste to
reassure her by protestations of devotedness. These protestations were
nothing for Mme. Bonacieux, for such protestations may be made with the
worst intentions in the world; but the voice was all. Mme. Bonacieux
thought she recognized the sound of that voice; she reopened her eyes,
cast a quick glance upon the man who had terrified her so, and at once
perceiving it was d’Artagnan, she uttered a cry of joy, “Oh, it is you,
it is you! Thank God, thank God!”

“Yes, it is I,” said d’Artagnan, “it is I, whom God has sent to watch
over you.”

“Was it with that intention you followed me?” asked the young woman,
with a coquettish smile, whose somewhat bantering character resumed its
influence, and with whom all fear had disappeared from the moment in
which she recognized a friend in one she had taken for an enemy.

“No,” said d’Artagnan; “no, I confess it. It was chance that threw me in
your way; I saw a woman knocking at the window of one of my friends.”

“One of your friends?” interrupted Mme. Bonacieux.

“Without doubt; Aramis is one of my best friends.”

“Aramis! Who is he?”

“Come, come, you won’t tell me you don’t know Aramis?”

“This is the first time I ever heard his name pronounced.”

“It is the first time, then, that you ever went to that house?”

“Undoubtedly.”

“And you did not know that it was inhabited by a young man?”

“No.”

“By a Musketeer?”

“No, indeed!”

“It was not he, then, you came to seek?”

“Not the least in the world. Besides, you must have seen that the person
to whom I spoke was a woman.”

“That is true; but this woman is a friend of Aramis--”

“I know nothing of that.”

“--since she lodges with him.”

“That does not concern me.”

“But who is she?”

“Oh, that is not my secret.”

“My dear Madame Bonacieux, you are charming; but at the same time you
are one of the most mysterious women.”

“Do I lose by that?”

“No; you are, on the contrary, adorable.”

“Give me your arm, then.”

“Most willingly. And now?”

“Now escort me.”

“Where?”

“Where I am going.”

“But where are you going?”

“You will see, because you will leave me at the door.”

“Shall I wait for you?”

“That will be useless.”

“You will return alone, then?”

“Perhaps yes, perhaps no.”

“But will the person who shall accompany you afterward be a man or a
woman?”

“I don’t know yet.”

“But I will know it!”

“How so?”

“I will wait until you come out.”

“In that case, adieu.”

“Why so?”

“I do not want you.”

“But you have claimed--”

“The aid of a gentleman, not the watchfulness of a spy.”

“The word is rather hard.”

“How are they called who follow others in spite of them?”

“They are indiscreet.”

“The word is too mild.”

“Well, madame, I perceive I must do as you wish.”

“Why did you deprive yourself of the merit of doing so at once?”

“Is there no merit in repentance?”

“And do you really repent?”

“I know nothing about it myself. But what I know is that I promise to do
all you wish if you allow me to accompany you where you are going.”

“And you will leave me then?”

“Yes.”

“Without waiting for my coming out again?”

“Yes.”

“Word of honor?”

“By the faith of a gentleman. Take my arm, and let us go.”

D’Artagnan offered his arm to Mme. Bonacieux, who willingly took it,
half laughing, half trembling, and both gained the top of Rue de la
Harpe. Arriving there, the young woman seemed to hesitate, as she had
before done in the Rue Vaugirard. She seemed, however, by certain signs,
to recognize a door, and approaching that door, “And now, monsieur,”
said she, “it is here I have business; a thousand thanks for your
honorable company, which has saved me from all the dangers to which,
alone, I was exposed. But the moment is come to keep your word; I have
reached my destination.”

“And you will have nothing to fear on your return?”

“I shall have nothing to fear but robbers.”

“And that is nothing?”

“What could they take from me? I have not a penny about me.”

“You forget that beautiful handkerchief with the coat of arms.”

“Which?”

“That which I found at your feet, and replaced in your pocket.”

“Hold your tongue, imprudent man! Do you wish to destroy me?”

“You see very plainly that there is still danger for you, since a single
word makes you tremble; and you confess that if that word were heard you
would be ruined. Come, come, madame!” cried d’Artagnan, seizing her
hands, and surveying her with an ardent glance, “come, be more generous.
Confide in me. Have you not read in my eyes that there is nothing but
devotion and sympathy in my heart?”

“Yes,” replied Mme. Bonacieux; “therefore, ask my own secrets, and I
will reveal them to you; but those of others--that is quite another
thing.”

“Very well,” said d’Artagnan, “I shall discover them; as these secrets
may have an influence over your life, these secrets must become mine.”

“Beware of what you do!” cried the young woman, in a manner so serious
as to make d’Artagnan start in spite of himself. “Oh, meddle in nothing
which concerns me. Do not seek to assist me in that which I am
accomplishing. This I ask of you in the name of the interest with which
I inspire you, in the name of the service you have rendered me and which
I never shall forget while I have life. Rather, place faith in what I
tell you. Have no more concern about me; I exist no longer for you, any
more than if you had never seen me.”

“Must Aramis do as much as I, madame?” said d’Artagnan, deeply piqued.

“This is the second or third time, monsieur, that you have repeated that
name, and yet I have told you that I do not know him.”

“You do not know the man at whose shutter you have just knocked? Indeed,
madame, you believe me too credulous!”

“Confess that it is for the sake of making me talk that you invent this
story and create this personage.”

“I invent nothing, madame; I create nothing. I only speak that exact
truth.”

“And you say that one of your friends lives in that house?”

“I say so, and I repeat it for the third time; that house is one
inhabited by my friend, and that friend is Aramis.”

“All this will be cleared up at a later period,” murmured the young
woman; “no, monsieur, be silent.”

“If you could see my heart,” said d’Artagnan, “you would there read so
much curiosity that you would pity me and so much love that you would
instantly satisfy my curiosity. We have nothing to fear from those who
love us.”

“You speak very suddenly of love, monsieur,” said the young woman,
shaking her head.

“That is because love has come suddenly upon me, and for the first time;
and because I am only twenty.”

The young woman looked at him furtively.

“Listen; I am already upon the scent,” resumed d’Artagnan. “About three
months ago I was near having a duel with Aramis concerning a
handkerchief resembling the one you showed to the woman in his
house--for a handkerchief marked in the same manner, I am sure.”

“Monsieur,” said the young woman, “you weary me very much, I assure you,
with your questions.”

“But you, madame, prudent as you are, think, if you were to be arrested
with that handkerchief, and that handkerchief were to be seized, would
you not be compromised?”

“In what way? The initials are only mine--C. B., Constance Bonacieux.”

“Or Camille de Bois-Tracy.”

“Silence, monsieur! Once again, silence! Ah, since the dangers I incur
on my own account cannot stop you, think of those you may yourself run!”

“Me?”

“Yes; there is peril of imprisonment, risk of life in knowing me.”

“Then I will not leave you.”

“Monsieur!” said the young woman, supplicating him and clasping her
hands together, “monsieur, in the name of heaven, by the honor of a
soldier, by the courtesy of a gentleman, depart! There, there midnight
sounds! That is the hour when I am expected.”

“Madame,” said the young man, bowing; “I can refuse nothing asked of me
thus. Be content; I will depart.”

“But you will not follow me; you will not watch me?”

“I will return home instantly.”

“Ah, I was quite sure you were a good and brave young man,” said Mme.
Bonacieux, holding out her hand to him, and placing the other upon the
knocker of a little door almost hidden in the wall.

D’Artagnan seized the hand held out to him, and kissed it ardently.

“Ah! I wish I had never seen you!” cried d’Artagnan, with that ingenuous
roughness which women often prefer to the affectations of politeness,
because it betrays the depths of the thought and proves that feeling
prevails over reason.

“Well!” resumed Mme. Bonacieux, in a voice almost caressing, and
pressing the hand of d’Artagnan, who had not relinquished hers, “well: I
will not say as much as you do; what is lost for today may not be lost
forever. Who knows, when I shall be at liberty, that I may not satisfy
your curiosity?”

“And will you make the same promise to my love?” cried d’Artagnan,
beside himself with joy.

“Oh, as to that, I do not engage myself. That depends upon the
sentiments with which you may inspire me.”

“Then today, madame--”

“Oh, today, I am no further than gratitude.”

“Ah! You are too charming,” said d’Artagnan, sorrowfully; “and you abuse
my love.”

“No, I use your generosity, that’s all. But be of good cheer; with
certain people, everything comes round.”

“Oh, you render me the happiest of men! Do not forget this evening--do
not forget that promise.”

“Be satisfied. In the proper time and place I will remember everything.
Now then, go, go, in the name of heaven! I was expected at sharp
midnight, and I am late.”

“By five minutes.”

“Yes; but in certain circumstances five minutes are five ages.”

“When one loves.”

“Well! And who told you I had no affair with a lover?”

“It is a man, then, who expects you?” cried d’Artagnan. “A man!”

“The discussion is going to begin again!” said Mme. Bonacieux, with a
half-smile which was not exempt from a tinge of impatience.

“No, no; I go, I depart! I believe in you, and I would have all the
merit of my devotion, even if that devotion were stupidity. Adieu,
madame, adieu!”

And as if he only felt strength to detach himself by a violent effort
from the hand he held, he sprang away, running, while Mme. Bonacieux
knocked, as at the shutter, three light and regular taps. When he had
gained the angle of the street, he turned. The door had been opened, and
shut again; the mercer’s pretty wife had disappeared.

D’Artagnan pursued his way. He had given his word not to watch Mme.
Bonacieux, and if his life had depended upon the spot to which she was
going or upon the person who should accompany her, d’Artagnan would have
returned home, since he had so promised. Five minutes later he was in
the Rue des Fossoyeurs.

“Poor Athos!” said he; “he will never guess what all this means. He will
have fallen asleep waiting for me, or else he will have returned home,
where he will have learned that a woman had been there. A woman with
Athos! After all,” continued d’Artagnan, “there was certainly one with
Aramis. All this is very strange; and I am curious to know how it will
end.”

“Badly, monsieur, badly!” replied a voice which the young man recognized
as that of Planchet; for, soliloquizing aloud, as very preoccupied
people do, he had entered the alley, at the end of which were the stairs
which led to his chamber.

“How, badly? What do you mean by that, you idiot?” asked d’Artagnan.
“What has happened?”

“All sorts of misfortunes.”

“What?”

“In the first place, Monsieur Athos is arrested.”

“Arrested! Athos arrested! What for?”

“He was found in your lodging; they took him for you.”

“And by whom was he arrested?”

“By Guards brought by the men in black whom you put to flight.”

“Why did he not tell them his name? Why did he not tell them he knew
nothing about this affair?”

“He took care not to do so, monsieur; on the contrary, he came up to me
and said, ‘It is your master that needs his liberty at this moment and
not I, since he knows everything and I know nothing. They will believe
he is arrested, and that will give him time; in three days I will tell
them who I am, and they cannot fail to let me go.’”

“Bravo, Athos! Noble heart!” murmured d’Artagnan. “I know him well
there! And what did the officers do?”

“Four conveyed him away, I don’t know where--to the Bastille or Fort
l’Eveque. Two remained with the men in black, who rummaged every place
and took all the papers. The last two mounted guard at the door during
this examination; then, when all was over, they went away, leaving the
house empty and exposed.”

“And Porthos and Aramis?”

“I could not find them; they did not come.”

“But they may come any moment, for you left word that I awaited them?”

“Yes, monsieur.”

“Well, don’t budge, then; if they come, tell them what has happened. Let
them wait for me at the Pomme-de-Pin. Here it would be dangerous; the
house may be watched. I will run to Monsieur de Treville to tell them
all this, and will meet them there.”

“Very well, monsieur,” said Planchet.

“But you will remain; you are not afraid?” said d’Artagnan, coming back
to recommend courage to his lackey.

“Be easy, monsieur,” said Planchet; “you do not know me yet. I am brave
when I set about it. It is all in beginning. Besides, I am a Picard.”

“Then it is understood,” said d’Artagnan; “you would rather be killed
than desert your post?”

“Yes, monsieur; and there is nothing I would not do to prove to Monsieur
that I am attached to him.”

“Good!” said d’Artagnan to himself. “It appears that the method I have
adopted with this boy is decidedly the best. I shall use it again upon
occasion.”

And with all the swiftness of his legs, already a little fatigued,
however, with the perambulations of the day, d’Artagnan directed his
course toward M. de Treville’s.

M de Treville was not at his hotel. His company was on guard at the
Louvre; he was at the Louvre with his company.

It was necessary to reach M. de Treville; it was important that he
should be informed of what was passing. D’Artagnan resolved to try and
enter the Louvre. His costume of Guardsman in the company of M.
Dessessart ought to be his passport.

He therefore went down the Rue des Petits Augustins, and came up to the
quay, in order to take the New Bridge. He had at first an idea of
crossing by the ferry; but on gaining the riverside, he had mechanically
put his hand into his pocket, and perceived that he had not wherewithal
to pay his passage.

As he gained the top of the Rue Guenegaud, he saw two persons coming out
of the Rue Dauphine whose appearance very much struck him. Of the two
persons who composed this group, one was a man and the other a woman.
The woman had the outline of Mme. Bonacieux; the man resembled Aramis so
much as to be mistaken for him.

Besides, the woman wore that black mantle which d’Artagnan could still
see outlined on the shutter of the Rue de Vaugirard and on the door of
the Rue de la Harpe; still further, the man wore the uniform of a
Musketeer.

The woman’s hood was pulled down, and the man held a handkerchief to his
face. Both, as this double precaution indicated, had an interest in not
being recognized.

They took the bridge. That was d’Artagnan’s road, as he was going to the
Louvre. D’Artagnan followed them.

He had not gone twenty steps before he became convinced that the woman
was really Mme. Bonacieux and that the man was Aramis.

He felt at that instant all the suspicions of jealousy agitating his
heart. He felt himself doubly betrayed, by his friend and by her whom he
already loved like a mistress. Mme. Bonacieux had declared to him, by
all the gods, that she did not know Aramis; and a quarter of an hour
after having made this assertion, he found her hanging on the arm of
Aramis.

D’Artagnan did not reflect that he had only known the mercer’s pretty
wife for three hours; that she owed him nothing but a little gratitude
for having delivered her from the men in black, who wished to carry her
off, and that she had promised him nothing. He considered himself an
outraged, betrayed, and ridiculed lover. Blood and anger mounted to his
face; he was resolved to unravel the mystery.

The young man and young woman perceived they were watched, and redoubled
their speed. D’Artagnan determined upon his course. He passed them, then
returned so as to meet them exactly before the Samaritaine, which was
illuminated by a lamp which threw its light over all that part of the
bridge.

D’Artagnan stopped before them, and they stopped before him.

“What do you want, monsieur?” demanded the Musketeer, recoiling a step,
and with a foreign accent, which proved to d’Artagnan that he was
deceived in one of his conjectures.

“It is not Aramis!” cried he.

“No, monsieur, it is not Aramis; and by your exclamation I perceive you
have mistaken me for another, and pardon you.”

“You pardon me?” cried d’Artagnan.

“Yes,” replied the stranger. “Allow me, then, to pass on, since it is
not with me you have anything to do.”

“You are right, monsieur, it is not with you that I have anything to do;
it is with Madame.”

“With Madame! You do not know her,” replied the stranger.

“You are deceived, monsieur; I know her very well.”

“Ah,” said Mme. Bonacieux; in a tone of reproach, “ah, monsieur, I had
your promise as a soldier and your word as a gentleman. I hoped to be
able to rely upon that.”

“And I, madame!” said d’Artagnan, embarrassed; “you promised me--”

“Take my arm, madame,” said the stranger, “and let us continue our way.”

D’Artagnan, however, stupefied, cast down, annihilated by all that
happened, stood, with crossed arms, before the Musketeer and Mme.
Bonacieux.

The Musketeer advanced two steps, and pushed d’Artagnan aside with his
hand. D’Artagnan made a spring backward and drew his sword. At the same
time, and with the rapidity of lightning, the stranger drew his.

“In the name of heaven, my Lord!” cried Mme. Bonacieux, throwing herself
between the combatants and seizing the swords with her hands.

“My Lord!” cried d’Artagnan, enlightened by a sudden idea, “my Lord!
Pardon me, monsieur, but you are not--”

“My Lord the Duke of Buckingham,” said Mme. Bonacieux, in an undertone;
“and now you may ruin us all.”

“My Lord, Madame, I ask a hundred pardons! But I love her, my Lord, and
was jealous. You know what it is to love, my Lord. Pardon me, and then
tell me how I can risk my life to serve your Grace?”

“You are a brave young man,” said Buckingham, holding out his hand to
d’Artagnan, who pressed it respectfully. “You offer me your services;
with the same frankness I accept them. Follow us at a distance of twenty
paces, as far as the Louvre, and if anyone watches us, slay him!”

D’Artagnan placed his naked sword under his arm, allowed the duke and
Mme. Bonacieux to take twenty steps ahead, and then followed them, ready
to execute the instructions of the noble and elegant minister of Charles
I.

Fortunately, he had no opportunity to give the duke this proof of his
devotion, and the young woman and the handsome Musketeer entered the
Louvre by the wicket of the Echelle without any interference.

As for d’Artagnan, he immediately repaired to the cabaret of the
Pomme-de-Pin, where he found Porthos and Aramis awaiting him. Without
giving them any explanation of the alarm and inconvenience he had caused
them, he told them that he had terminated the affair alone in which he
had for a moment believed he should need their assistance.

Meanwhile, carried away as we are by our narrative, we must leave our
three friends to themselves, and follow the Duke of Buckingham and his
guide through the labyrinths of the Louvre.




12 GEORGE VILLIERS, DUKE OF BUCKINGHAM


Mme. Bonacieux and the duke entered the Louvre without difficulty. Mme.
Bonacieux was known to belong to the queen; the duke wore the uniform of
the Musketeers of M. de Treville, who, as we have said, were that
evening on guard. Besides, Germain was in the interests of the queen;
and if anything should happen, Mme. Bonacieux would be accused of having
introduced her lover into the Louvre, that was all. She took the risk
upon herself. Her reputation would be lost, it is true; but of what
value in the world was the reputation of the little wife of a mercer?

Once within the interior of the court, the duke and the young woman
followed the wall for the space of about twenty-five steps. This space
passed, Mme. Bonacieux pushed a little servants’ door, open by day but
generally closed at night. The door yielded. Both entered, and found
themselves in darkness; but Mme. Bonacieux was acquainted with all the
turnings and windings of this part of the Louvre, appropriated for the
people of the household. She closed the door after her, took the duke by
the hand, and after a few experimental steps, grasped a balustrade, put
her foot upon the bottom step, and began to ascend the staircase. The
duke counted two stories. She then turned to the right, followed the
course of a long corridor, descended a flight, went a few steps farther,
introduced a key into a lock, opened a door, and pushed the duke into an
apartment lighted only by a lamp, saying, “Remain here, my Lord Duke;
someone will come.” She then went out by the same door, which she
locked, so that the duke found himself literally a prisoner.

Nevertheless, isolated as he was, we must say that the Duke of
Buckingham did not experience an instant of fear. One of the salient
points of his character was the search for adventures and a love of
romance. Brave, rash, and enterprising, this was not the first time he
had risked his life in such attempts. He had learned that the pretended
message from Anne of Austria, upon the faith of which he had come to
Paris, was a snare; but instead of regaining England, he had, abusing
the position in which he had been placed, declared to the queen that he
would not depart without seeing her. The queen had at first positively
refused; but at length became afraid that the duke, if exasperated,
would commit some folly. She had already decided upon seeing him and
urging his immediate departure, when, on the very evening of coming to
this decision, Mme. Bonacieux, who was charged with going to fetch the
duke and conducting him to the Louvre, was abducted. For two days no one
knew what had become of her, and everything remained in suspense; but
once free, and placed in communication with Laporte, matters resumed
their course, and she accomplished the perilous enterprise which, but
for her arrest, would have been executed three days earlier.

Buckingham, left alone, walked toward a mirror. His Musketeer’s uniform
became him marvelously.

At thirty-five, which was then his age, he passed, with just title, for
the handsomest gentleman and the most elegant cavalier of France or
England.

The favorite of two kings, immensely rich, all-powerful in a kingdom
which he disordered at his fancy and calmed again at his caprice, George
Villiers, Duke of Buckingham, had lived one of those fabulous existences
which survive, in the course of centuries, to astonish posterity.

Sure of himself, convinced of his own power, certain that the laws which
rule other men could not reach him, he went straight to the object he
aimed at, even were this object were so elevated and so dazzling that it
would have been madness for any other even to have contemplated it. It
was thus he had succeeded in approaching several times the beautiful and
proud Anne of Austria, and in making himself loved by dazzling her.

George Villiers placed himself before the glass, as we have said,
restored the undulations to his beautiful hair, which the weight of his
hat had disordered, twisted his mustache, and, his heart swelling with
joy, happy and proud at being near the moment he had so long sighed for,
he smiled upon himself with pride and hope.

At this moment a door concealed in the tapestry opened, and a woman
appeared. Buckingham saw this apparition in the glass; he uttered a cry.
It was the queen!

Anne of Austria was then twenty-six or twenty-seven years of age; that
is to say, she was in the full splendor of her beauty.

Her carriage was that of a queen or a goddess; her eyes, which cast the
brilliancy of emeralds, were perfectly beautiful, and yet were at the
same time full of sweetness and majesty.

Her mouth was small and rosy; and although her underlip, like that of
all princes of the House of Austria, protruded slightly beyond the
other, it was eminently lovely in its smile, but as profoundly
disdainful in its contempt.

Her skin was admired for its velvety softness; her hands and arms were
of surpassing beauty, all the poets of the time singing them as
incomparable.

Lastly, her hair, which, from being light in her youth, had become
chestnut, and which she wore curled very plainly, and with much powder,
admirably set off her face, in which the most rigid critic could only
have desired a little less rouge, and the most fastidious sculptor a
little more fineness in the nose.

Buckingham remained for a moment dazzled. Never had Anne of Austria
appeared to him so beautiful, amid balls, fetes, or carousals, as she
appeared to him at this moment, dressed in a simple robe of white satin,
and accompanied by Donna Estafania--the only one of her Spanish women
who had not been driven from her by the jealousy of the king or by the
persecutions of Richelieu.

Anne of Austria took two steps forward. Buckingham threw himself at her
feet, and before the queen could prevent him, kissed the hem of her
robe.

“Duke, you already know that it is not I who caused you to be written
to.”

“Yes, yes, madame! Yes, your Majesty!” cried the duke. “I know that I
must have been mad, senseless, to believe that snow would become
animated or marble warm; but what then! They who love believe easily in
love. Besides, I have lost nothing by this journey because I see you.”

“Yes,” replied Anne, “but you know why and how I see you; because,
insensible to all my sufferings, you persist in remaining in a city
where, by remaining, you run the risk of your life, and make me run the
risk of my honor. I see you to tell you that everything separates
us--the depths of the sea, the enmity of kingdoms, the sanctity of vows.
It is sacrilege to struggle against so many things, my Lord. In short, I
see you to tell you that we must never see each other again.”

“Speak on, madame, speak on, Queen,” said Buckingham; “the sweetness of
your voice covers the harshness of your words. You talk of sacrilege!
Why, the sacrilege is the separation of two hearts formed by God for
each other.”

“My Lord,” cried the queen, “you forget that I have never said that I
love you.”

“But you have never told me that you did not love me; and truly, to
speak such words to me would be, on the part of your Majesty, too great
an ingratitude. For tell me, where can you find a love like mine--a love
which neither time, nor absence, nor despair can extinguish, a love
which contents itself with a lost ribbon, a stray look, or a chance
word? It is now three years, madame, since I saw you for the first time,
and during those three years I have loved you thus. Shall I tell you
each ornament of your toilet? Mark! I see you now. You were seated upon
cushions in the Spanish fashion; you wore a robe of green satin
embroidered with gold and silver, hanging sleeves knotted upon your
beautiful arms--those lovely arms--with large diamonds. You wore a close
ruff, a small cap upon your head of the same color as your robe, and in
that cap a heron’s feather. Hold! Hold! I shut my eyes, and I can see
you as you then were; I open them again, and I see what you are now--a
hundred times more beautiful!”

“What folly,” murmured Anne of Austria, who had not the courage to find
fault with the duke for having so well preserved her portrait in his
heart, “what folly to feed a useless passion with such remembrances!”

“And upon what then must I live? I have nothing but memory. It is my
happiness, my treasure, my hope. Every time I see you is a fresh diamond
which I enclose in the casket of my heart. This is the fourth which you
have let fall and I have picked up; for in three years, madame, I have
only seen you four times--the first, which I have described to you; the
second, at the mansion of Madame de Chevreuse; the third, in the gardens
of Amiens.”

“Duke,” said the queen, blushing, “never speak of that evening.”

“Oh, let us speak of it; on the contrary, let us speak of it! That is
the most happy and brilliant evening of my life! You remember what a
beautiful night it was? How soft and perfumed was the air; how lovely
the blue heavens and star-enameled sky! Ah, then, madame, I was able for
one instant to be alone with you. Then you were about to tell me
all--the isolation of your life, the griefs of your heart. You leaned
upon my arm--upon this, madame! I felt, in bending my head toward you,
your beautiful hair touch my cheek; and every time that it touched me I
trembled from head to foot. Oh, Queen! Queen! You do not know what
felicity from heaven, what joys from paradise, are comprised in a moment
like that. Take my wealth, my fortune, my glory, all the days I have to
live, for such an instant, for a night like that. For that night,
madame, that night you loved me, I will swear it.”

“My Lord, yes; it is possible that the influence of the place, the charm
of the beautiful evening, the fascination of your look--the thousand
circumstances, in short, which sometimes unite to destroy a woman--were
grouped around me on that fatal evening; but, my Lord, you saw the queen
come to the aid of the woman who faltered. At the first word you dared
to utter, at the first freedom to which I had to reply, I called for
help.”

“Yes, yes, that is true. And any other love but mine would have sunk
beneath this ordeal; but my love came out from it more ardent and more
eternal. You believed that you would fly from me by returning to Paris;
you believed that I would not dare to quit the treasure over which my
master had charged me to watch. What to me were all the treasures in the
world, or all the kings of the earth! Eight days after, I was back
again, madame. That time you had nothing to say to me; I had risked my
life and favor to see you but for a second. I did not even touch your
hand, and you pardoned me on seeing me so submissive and so repentant.”

“Yes, but calumny seized upon all those follies in which I took no part,
as you well know, my Lord. The king, excited by the cardinal, made a
terrible clamor. Madame de Vernet was driven from me, Putange was
exiled, Madame de Chevreuse fell into disgrace, and when you wished to
come back as ambassador to France, the king himself--remember, my
lord--the king himself opposed it.”

“Yes, and France is about to pay for her king’s refusal with a war. I am
not allowed to see you, madame, but you shall every day hear of me. What
object, think you, have this expedition to Re and this league with the
Protestants of La Rochelle which I am projecting? The pleasure of seeing
you. I have no hope of penetrating, sword in hand, to Paris, I know that
well. But this war may bring round a peace; this peace will require a
negotiator; that negotiator will be me. They will not dare to refuse me
then; and I will return to Paris, and will see you again, and will be
happy for an instant. Thousands of men, it is true, will have to pay for
my happiness with their lives; but what is that to me, provided I see
you again! All this is perhaps folly--perhaps insanity; but tell me what
woman has a lover more truly in love; what queen a servant more ardent?”

“My Lord, my Lord, you invoke in your defense things which accuse you
more strongly. All these proofs of love which you would give me are
almost crimes.”

“Because you do not love me, madame! If you loved me, you would view all
this otherwise. If you loved me, oh, if you loved me, that would be too
great happiness, and I should run mad. Ah, Madame de Chevreuse was less
cruel than you. Holland loved her, and she responded to his love.”

“Madame de Chevreuse was not queen,” murmured Anne of Austria, overcome,
in spite of herself, by the expression of so profound a passion.

“You would love me, then, if you were not queen! Madame, say that you
would love me then! I can believe that it is the dignity of your rank
alone which makes you cruel to me; I can believe that, had you been
Madame de Chevreuse, poor Buckingham might have hoped. Thanks for those
sweet words! Oh, my beautiful sovereign, a hundred times, thanks!”

“Oh, my Lord! You have ill understood, wrongly interpreted; I did not
mean to say--”

“Silence, silence!” cried the duke. “If I am happy in an error, do not
have the cruelty to lift me from it. You have told me yourself, madame,
that I have been drawn into a snare; I, perhaps, may leave my life in
it--for, although it may be strange, I have for some time had a
presentiment that I should shortly die.” And the duke smiled, with a
smile at once sad and charming.

“Oh, my God!” cried Anne of Austria, with an accent of terror which
proved how much greater an interest she took in the duke than she
ventured to tell.

“I do not tell you this, madame, to terrify you; no, it is even
ridiculous for me to name it to you, and, believe me, I take no heed of
such dreams. But the words you have just spoken, the hope you have
almost given me, will have richly paid all--were it my life.”

“Oh, but I,” said Anne, “I also, duke, have had presentiments; I also
have had dreams. I dreamed that I saw you lying bleeding, wounded.”

“In the left side, was it not, and with a knife?” interrupted
Buckingham.

“Yes, it was so, my Lord, it was so--in the left side, and with a knife.
Who can possibly have told you I had had that dream? I have imparted it
to no one but my God, and that in my prayers.”

“I ask for no more. You love me, madame; it is enough.”

“I love you, I?”

“Yes, yes. Would God send the same dreams to you as to me if you did not
love me? Should we have the same presentiments if our existences did not
touch at the heart? You love me, my beautiful queen, and you will weep
for me?”

“Oh, my God, my God!” cried Anne of Austria, “this is more than I can
bear. In the name of heaven, Duke, leave me, go! I do not know whether I
love you or love you not; but what I know is that I will not be
perjured. Take pity on me, then, and go! Oh, if you are struck in
France, if you die in France, if I could imagine that your love for me
was the cause of your death, I could not console myself; I should run
mad. Depart then, depart, I implore you!”

“Oh, how beautiful you are thus! Oh, how I love you!” said Buckingham.

“Go, go, I implore you, and return hereafter! Come back as ambassador,
come back as minister, come back surrounded with guards who will defend
you, with servants who will watch over you, and then I shall no longer
fear for your days, and I shall be happy in seeing you.”

“Oh, is this true what you say?”

“Yes.”

“Oh, then, some pledge of your indulgence, some object which came from
you, and may remind me that I have not been dreaming; something you have
worn, and that I may wear in my turn--a ring, a necklace, a chain.”

“Will you depart--will you depart, if I give you that you demand?”

“Yes.”

“This very instant?”

“Yes.”

“You will leave France, you will return to England?”

“I will, I swear to you.”

“Wait, then, wait.”

Anne of Austria re-entered her apartment, and came out again almost
immediately, holding a rosewood casket in her hand, with her cipher
encrusted with gold.

“Here, my Lord, here,” said she, “keep this in memory of me.”

Buckingham took the casket, and fell a second time on his knees.

“You have promised me to go,” said the queen.

“And I keep my word. Your hand, madame, your hand, and I depart!”

Anne of Austria stretched forth her hand, closing her eyes, and leaning
with the other upon Estafania, for she felt that her strength was about
to fail her.

Buckingham pressed his lips passionately to that beautiful hand, and
then rising, said, “Within six months, if I am not dead, I shall have
seen you again, madame--even if I have to overturn the world.” And
faithful to the promise he had made, he rushed out of the apartment.

In the corridor he met Mme. Bonacieux, who waited for him, and who, with
the same precautions and the same good luck, conducted him out of the
Louvre.




13 MONSIEUR BONACIEUX


There was in all this, as may have been observed, one personage
concerned, of whom, notwithstanding his precarious position, we have
appeared to take but very little notice. This personage was M.
Bonacieux, the respectable martyr of the political and amorous intrigues
which entangled themselves so nicely together at this gallant and
chivalric period.

Fortunately, the reader may remember, or may not remember--fortunately
we have promised not to lose sight of him.

The officers who arrested him conducted him straight to the Bastille,
where he passed trembling before a party of soldiers who were loading
their muskets. Thence, introduced into a half-subterranean gallery, he
became, on the part of those who had brought him, the object of the
grossest insults and the harshest treatment. The officers perceived that
they had not to deal with a gentleman, and they treated him like a very
peasant.

At the end of half an hour or thereabouts, a clerk came to put an end to
his tortures, but not to his anxiety, by giving the order to conduct M.
Bonacieux to the Chamber of Examination. Ordinarily, prisoners were
interrogated in their cells; but they did not do so with M. Bonacieux.

Two guards attended the mercer who made him traverse a court and enter a
corridor in which were three sentinels, opened a door and pushed him
unceremoniously into a low room, where the only furniture was a table, a
chair, and a commissary. The commissary was seated in the chair, and was
writing at the table.

The two guards led the prisoner toward the table, and upon a sign from
the commissary drew back so far as to be unable to hear anything.

The commissary, who had till this time held his head down over his
papers, looked up to see what sort of person he had to do with. This
commissary was a man of very repulsive mien, with a pointed nose, with
yellow and salient cheek bones, with eyes small but keen and
penetrating, and an expression of countenance resembling at once the
polecat and the fox. His head, supported by a long and flexible neck,
issued from his large black robe, balancing itself with a motion very
much like that of the tortoise thrusting his head out of his shell. He
began by asking M. Bonacieux his name, age, condition, and abode.

The accused replied that his name was Jacques Michel Bonacieux, that he
was fifty-one years old, a retired mercer, and lived Rue des Fossoyeurs,
No. 14.

The commissary then, instead of continuing to interrogate him, made him
a long speech upon the danger there is for an obscure citizen to meddle
with public matters. He complicated this exordium by an exposition in
which he painted the power and the deeds of the cardinal, that
incomparable minister, that conqueror of past ministers, that example
for ministers to come--deeds and power which none could thwart with
impunity.

After this second part of his discourse, fixing his hawk’s eye upon poor
Bonacieux, he bade him reflect upon the gravity of his situation.

The reflections of the mercer were already made; he cursed the instant
when M. Laporte formed the idea of marrying him to his goddaughter, and
particularly the moment when that goddaughter had been received as Lady
of the Linen to her Majesty.

At bottom the character of M. Bonacieux was one of profound selfishness
mixed with sordid avarice, the whole seasoned with extreme cowardice.
The love with which his young wife had inspired him was a secondary
sentiment, and was not strong enough to contend with the primitive
feelings we have just enumerated. Bonacieux indeed reflected on what had
just been said to him.

“But, Monsieur Commissary,” said he, calmly, “believe that I know and
appreciate, more than anybody, the merit of the incomparable eminence by
whom we have the honor to be governed.”

“Indeed?” asked the commissary, with an air of doubt. “If that is really
so, how came you in the Bastille?”

“How I came there, or rather why I am there,” replied Bonacieux, “that
is entirely impossible for me to tell you, because I don’t know myself;
but to a certainty it is not for having, knowingly at least, disobliged
Monsieur the Cardinal.”

“You must, nevertheless, have committed a crime, since you are here and
are accused of high treason.”

“Of high treason!” cried Bonacieux, terrified; “of high treason! How is
it possible for a poor mercer, who detests Huguenots and who abhors
Spaniards, to be accused of high treason? Consider, monsieur, the thing
is absolutely impossible.”

“Monsieur Bonacieux,” said the commissary, looking at the accused as if
his little eyes had the faculty of reading to the very depths of hearts,
“you have a wife?”

“Yes, monsieur,” replied the mercer, in a tremble, feeling that it was
at this point affairs were likely to become perplexing; “that is to say,
I HAD one.”

“What, you ‘had one’? What have you done with her, then, if you have her
no longer?”

“They have abducted her, monsieur.”

“They have abducted her? Ah!”

Bonacieux inferred from this “Ah” that the affair grew more and more
intricate.

“They have abducted her,” added the commissary; “and do you know the man
who has committed this deed?”

“I think I know him.”

“Who is he?”

“Remember that I affirm nothing, Monsieur the Commissary, and that I
only suspect.”

“Whom do you suspect? Come, answer freely.”

M Bonacieux was in the greatest perplexity possible. Had he better deny
everything or tell everything? By denying all, it might be suspected
that he must know too much to avow; by confessing all he might prove his
good will. He decided, then, to tell all.

“I suspect,” said he, “a tall, dark man, of lofty carriage, who has the
air of a great lord. He has followed us several times, as I think, when
I have waited for my wife at the wicket of the Louvre to escort her
home.”

The commissary now appeared to experience a little uneasiness.

“And his name?” said he.

“Oh, as to his name, I know nothing about it; but if I were ever to meet
him, I should recognize him in an instant, I will answer for it, were he
among a thousand persons.”

The face of the commissary grew still darker.

“You should recognize him among a thousand, say you?” continued he.

“That is to say,” cried Bonacieux, who saw he had taken a false step,
“that is to say--”

“You have answered that you should recognize him,” said the commissary.
“That is all very well, and enough for today; before we proceed further,
someone must be informed that you know the ravisher of your wife.”

“But I have not told you that I know him!” cried Bonacieux, in despair.
“I told you, on the contrary--”

“Take away the prisoner,” said the commissary to the two guards.

“Where must we place him?” demanded the chief.

“In a dungeon.”

“Which?”

“Good Lord! In the first one handy, provided it is safe,” said the
commissary, with an indifference which penetrated poor Bonacieux with
horror.

“Alas, alas!” said he to himself, “misfortune is over my head; my wife
must have committed some frightful crime. They believe me her
accomplice, and will punish me with her. She must have spoken; she must
have confessed everything--a woman is so weak! A dungeon! The first he
comes to! That’s it! A night is soon passed; and tomorrow to the wheel,
to the gallows! Oh, my God, my God, have pity on me!”

Without listening the least in the world to the lamentations of M.
Bonacieux--lamentations to which, besides, they must have been pretty
well accustomed--the two guards took the prisoner each by an arm, and
led him away, while the commissary wrote a letter in haste and
dispatched it by an officer in waiting.

Bonacieux could not close his eyes; not because his dungeon was so very
disagreeable, but because his uneasiness was so great. He sat all night
on his stool, starting at the least noise; and when the first rays of
the sun penetrated into his chamber, the dawn itself appeared to him to
have taken funereal tints.

All at once he heard his bolts drawn, and made a terrified bound. He
believed they were come to conduct him to the scaffold; so that when he
saw merely and simply, instead of the executioner he expected, only his
commissary of the preceding evening, attended by his clerk, he was ready
to embrace them both.

“Your affair has become more complicated since yesterday evening, my
good man, and I advise you to tell the whole truth; for your repentance
alone can remove the anger of the cardinal.”

“Why, I am ready to tell everything,” cried Bonacieux, “at least, all
that I know. Interrogate me, I entreat you!”

“Where is your wife, in the first place?”

“Why, did not I tell you she had been stolen from me?”

“Yes, but yesterday at five o’clock in the afternoon, thanks to you, she
escaped.”

“My wife escaped!” cried Bonacieux. “Oh, unfortunate creature! Monsieur,
if she has escaped, it is not my fault, I swear.”

“What business had you, then, to go into the chamber of Monsieur
d’Artagnan, your neighbor, with whom you had a long conference during
the day?”

“Ah, yes, Monsieur Commissary; yes, that is true, and I confess that I
was in the wrong. I did go to Monsieur d’Artagnan’s.”

“What was the aim of that visit?”

“To beg him to assist me in finding my wife. I believed I had a right to
endeavor to find her. I was deceived, as it appears, and I ask your
pardon.”

“And what did Monsieur d’Artagnan reply?”

“Monsieur d’Artagnan promised me his assistance; but I soon found out
that he was betraying me.”

“You impose upon justice. Monsieur d’Artagnan made a compact with you;
and in virtue of that compact put to flight the police who had arrested
your wife, and has placed her beyond reach.”

“M. d’Artagnan has abducted my wife! Come now, what are you telling me?”

“Fortunately, Monsieur d’Artagnan is in our hands, and you shall be
confronted with him.”

“By my faith, I ask no better,” cried Bonacieux; “I shall not be sorry
to see the face of an acquaintance.”

“Bring in the Monsieur d’Artagnan,” said the commissary to the guards.
The two guards led in Athos.

“Monsieur d’Artagnan,” said the commissary, addressing Athos, “declare
all that passed yesterday between you and Monsieur.”

“But,” cried Bonacieux, “this is not Monsieur d’Artagnan whom you show
me.”

“What! Not Monsieur d’Artagnan?” exclaimed the commissary.

“Not the least in the world,” replied Bonacieux.

“What is this gentleman’s name?” asked the commissary.

“I cannot tell you; I don’t know him.”

“How! You don’t know him?”

“No.”

“Did you never see him?”

“Yes, I have seen him, but I don’t know what he calls himself.”

“Your name?” replied the commissary.

“Athos,” replied the Musketeer.

“But that is not a man’s name; that is the name of a mountain,” cried
the poor questioner, who began to lose his head.

“That is my name,” said Athos, quietly.

“But you said that your name was d’Artagnan.”

“Who, I?”

“Yes, you.”

“Somebody said to me, ‘You are Monsieur d’Artagnan?’ I answered, ‘You
think so?’ My guards exclaimed that they were sure of it. I did not wish
to contradict them; besides, I might be deceived.”

“Monsieur, you insult the majesty of justice.”

“Not at all,” said Athos, calmly.

“You are Monsieur d’Artagnan.”

“You see, monsieur, that you say it again.”

“But I tell you, Monsieur Commissary,” cried Bonacieux, in his turn,
“there is not the least doubt about the matter. Monsieur d’Artagnan is
my tenant, although he does not pay me my rent--and even better on that
account ought I to know him. Monsieur d’Artagnan is a young man,
scarcely nineteen or twenty, and this gentleman must be thirty at least.
Monsieur d’Artagnan is in Monsieur Dessessart’s Guards, and this
gentleman is in the company of Monsieur de Treville’s Musketeers. Look
at his uniform, Monsieur Commissary, look at his uniform!”

“That’s true,” murmured the commissary; “PARDIEU, that’s true.”

At this moment the door was opened quickly, and a messenger, introduced
by one of the gatekeepers of the Bastille, gave a letter to the
commissary.

“Oh, unhappy woman!” cried the commissary.

“How? What do you say? Of whom do you speak? It is not of my wife, I
hope!”

“On the contrary, it is of her. Yours is a pretty business.”

“But,” said the agitated mercer, “do me the pleasure, monsieur, to tell
me how my own proper affair can become worse by anything my wife does
while I am in prison?”

“Because that which she does is part of a plan concerted between you--of
an infernal plan.”

“I swear to you, Monsieur Commissary, that you are in the profoundest
error, that I know nothing in the world about what my wife had to do,
that I am entirely a stranger to what she has done; and that if she has
committed any follies, I renounce her, I abjure her, I curse her!”

“Bah!” said Athos to the commissary, “if you have no more need of me,
send me somewhere. Your Monsieur Bonacieux is very tiresome.”

The commissary designated by the same gesture Athos and Bonacieux, “Let
them be guarded more closely than ever.”

“And yet,” said Athos, with his habitual calmness, “if it be Monsieur
d’Artagnan who is concerned in this matter, I do not perceive how I can
take his place.”

“Do as I bade you,” cried the commissary, “and preserve absolute
secrecy. You understand!”

Athos shrugged his shoulders, and followed his guards silently, while M.
Bonacieux uttered lamentations enough to break the heart of a tiger.

They locked the mercer in the same dungeon where he had passed the
night, and left him to himself during the day. Bonacieux wept all day,
like a true mercer, not being at all a military man, as he himself
informed us. In the evening, about nine o’clock, at the moment he had
made up his mind to go to bed, he heard steps in his corridor. These
steps drew near to his dungeon, the door was thrown open, and the guards
appeared.

“Follow me,” said an officer, who came up behind the guards.

“Follow you!” cried Bonacieux, “follow you at this hour! Where, my God?”

“Where we have orders to lead you.”

“But that is not an answer.”

“It is, nevertheless, the only one we can give.”

“Ah, my God, my God!” murmured the poor mercer, “now, indeed, I am
lost!” And he followed the guards who came for him, mechanically and
without resistance.

He passed along the same corridor as before, crossed one court, then a
second side of a building; at length, at the gate of the entrance court
he found a carriage surrounded by four guards on horseback. They made
him enter this carriage, the officer placed himself by his side, the
door was locked, and they were left in a rolling prison. The carriage
was put in motion as slowly as a funeral car. Through the closely
fastened windows the prisoner could perceive the houses and the
pavement, that was all; but, true Parisian as he was, Bonacieux could
recognize every street by the milestones, the signs, and the lamps. At
the moment of arriving at St. Paul--the spot where such as were
condemned at the Bastille were executed--he was near fainting and
crossed himself twice. He thought the carriage was about to stop there.
The carriage, however, passed on.

Farther on, a still greater terror seized him on passing by the cemetery
of St. Jean, where state criminals were buried. One thing, however,
reassured him; he remembered that before they were buried their heads
were generally cut off, and he felt that his head was still on his
shoulders. But when he saw the carriage take the way to La Greve, when
he perceived the pointed roof of the Hotel de Ville, and the carriage
passed under the arcade, he believed it was over with him. He wished to
confess to the officer, and upon his refusal, uttered such pitiable
cries that the officer told him that if he continued to deafen him thus,
he should put a gag in his mouth.

This measure somewhat reassured Bonacieux. If they meant to execute him
at La Greve, it could scarcely be worth while to gag him, as they had
nearly reached the place of execution. Indeed, the carriage crossed the
fatal spot without stopping. There remained, then, no other place to
fear but the Traitor’s Cross; the carriage was taking the direct road to
it.

This time there was no longer any doubt; it was at the Traitor’s Cross
that lesser criminals were executed. Bonacieux had flattered himself in
believing himself worthy of St. Paul or of the Place de Greve; it was at
the Traitor’s Cross that his journey and his destiny were about to end!
He could not yet see that dreadful cross, but he felt somehow as if it
were coming to meet him. When he was within twenty paces of it, he heard
a noise of people and the carriage stopped. This was more than poor
Bonacieux could endure, depressed as he was by the successive emotions
which he had experienced; he uttered a feeble groan which night have
been taken for the last sigh of a dying man, and fainted.




14 THE MAN OF MEUNG


The crowd was caused, not by the expectation of a man to be hanged, but
by the contemplation of a man who was hanged.

The carriage, which had been stopped for a minute, resumed its way,
passed through the crowd, threaded the Rue St. Honore, turned into the
Rue des Bons Enfants, and stopped before a low door.

The door opened; two guards received Bonacieux in their arms from the
officer who supported him. They carried him through an alley, up a
flight of stairs, and deposited him in an antechamber.

All these movements had been effected mechanically, as far as he was
concerned. He had walked as one walks in a dream; he had a glimpse of
objects as through a fog. His ears had perceived sounds without
comprehending them; he might have been executed at that moment without
his making a single gesture in his own defense or uttering a cry to
implore mercy.

He remained on the bench, with his back leaning against the wall and his
hands hanging down, exactly on the spot where the guards placed him.

On looking around him, however, as he could perceive no threatening
object, as nothing indicated that he ran any real danger, as the bench
was comfortably covered with a well-stuffed cushion, as the wall was
ornamented with a beautiful Cordova leather, and as large red damask
curtains, fastened back by gold clasps, floated before the window, he
perceived by degrees that his fear was exaggerated, and he began to turn
his head to the right and the left, upward and downward.

At this movement, which nobody opposed, he resumed a little courage, and
ventured to draw up one leg and then the other. At length, with the help
of his two hands he lifted himself from the bench, and found himself on
his feet.

At this moment an officer with a pleasant face opened a door, continued
to exchange some words with a person in the next chamber and then came
up to the prisoner. “Is your name Bonacieux?” said he.

“Yes, Monsieur Officer,” stammered the mercer, more dead than alive, “at
your service.”

“Come in,” said the officer.

And he moved out of the way to let the mercer pass. The latter obeyed
without reply, and entered the chamber, where he appeared to be
expected.

It was a large cabinet, close and stifling, with the walls furnished
with arms offensive and defensive, and in which there was already a
fire, although it was scarcely the end of the month of September. A
square table, covered with books and papers, upon which was unrolled an
immense plan of the city of La Rochelle, occupied the center of the
room.

Standing before the chimney was a man of middle height, of a haughty,
proud mien; with piercing eyes, a large brow, and a thin face, which was
made still longer by a ROYAL (or IMPERIAL, as it is now called),
surmounted by a pair of mustaches. Although this man was scarcely
thirty-six or thirty-seven years of age, hair, mustaches, and royal, all
began to be gray. This man, except a sword, had all the appearance of a
soldier; and his buff boots, still slightly covered with dust, indicated
that he had been on horseback in the course of the day.

This man was Armand Jean Duplessis, Cardinal de Richelieu; not such as
he is now represented--broken down like an old man, suffering like a
martyr, his body bent, his voice failing, buried in a large armchair as
in an anticipated tomb; no longer living but by the strength of his
genius, and no longer maintaining the struggle with Europe but by the
eternal application of his thoughts--but such as he really was at this
period; that is to say, an active and gallant cavalier, already weak of
body, but sustained by that moral power which made of him one of the
most extraordinary men that ever lived, preparing, after having
supported the Duc de Nevers in his duchy of Mantua, after having taken
Nimes, Castres, and Uzes, to drive the English from the Isle of Re and
lay siege to La Rochelle.

At first sight, nothing denoted the cardinal; and it was impossible for
those who did not know his face to guess in whose presence they were.

The poor mercer remained standing at the door, while the eyes of the
personage we have just described were fixed upon him, and appeared to
wish to penetrate even into the depths of the past.

“Is this that Bonacieux?” asked he, after a moment of silence.

“Yes, monseigneur,” replied the officer.

“That’s well. Give me those papers, and leave us.”

The officer took from the table the papers pointed out, gave them to him
who asked for them, bowed to the ground, and retired.

Bonacieux recognized in these papers his interrogatories of the
Bastille. From time to time the man by the chimney raised his eyes from
the writings, and plunged them like poniards into the heart of the poor
mercer.

At the end of ten minutes of reading and ten seconds of examination, the
cardinal was satisfied.

“That head has never conspired,” murmured he, “but it matters not; we
will see.”

“You are accused of high treason,” said the cardinal, slowly.

“So I have been told already, monseigneur,” cried Bonacieux, giving his
interrogator the title he had heard the officer give him, “but I swear
to you that I know nothing about it.”

The cardinal repressed a smile.

“You have conspired with your wife, with Madame de Chevreuse, and with
my Lord Duke of Buckingham.”

“Indeed, monseigneur,” responded the mercer, “I have heard her pronounce
all those names.”

“And on what occasion?”

“She said that the Cardinal de Richelieu had drawn the Duke of
Buckingham to Paris to ruin him and to ruin the queen.”

“She said that?” cried the cardinal, with violence.

“Yes, monseigneur, but I told her she was wrong to talk about such
things; and that his Eminence was incapable--”

“Hold your tongue! You are stupid,” replied the cardinal.

“That’s exactly what my wife said, monseigneur.”

“Do you know who carried off your wife?”

“No, monseigneur.”

“You have suspicions, nevertheless?”

“Yes, monseigneur; but these suspicions appeared to be disagreeable to
Monsieur the Commissary, and I no longer have them.”

“Your wife has escaped. Did you know that?”

“No, monseigneur. I learned it since I have been in prison, and that
from the conversation of Monsieur the Commissary--an amiable man.”

The cardinal repressed another smile.

“Then you are ignorant of what has become of your wife since her
flight.”

“Absolutely, monseigneur; but she has most likely returned to the
Louvre.”

“At one o’clock this morning she had not returned.”

“My God! What can have become of her, then?”

“We shall know, be assured. Nothing is concealed from the cardinal; the
cardinal knows everything.”

“In that case, monseigneur, do you believe the cardinal will be so kind
as to tell me what has become of my wife?”

“Perhaps he may; but you must, in the first place, reveal to the
cardinal all you know of your wife’s relations with Madame de
Chevreuse.”

“But, monseigneur, I know nothing about them; I have never seen her.”

“When you went to fetch your wife from the Louvre, did you always return
directly home?”

“Scarcely ever; she had business to transact with linen drapers, to
whose houses I conducted her.”

“And how many were there of these linen drapers?”

“Two, monseigneur.”

“And where did they live?”

“One in Rue de Vaugirard, the other Rue de la Harpe.”

“Did you go into these houses with her?”

“Never, monseigneur; I waited at the door.”

“And what excuse did she give you for entering all alone?”

“She gave me none; she told me to wait, and I waited.”

“You are a very complacent husband, my dear Monsieur Bonacieux,” said
the cardinal.

“He calls me his dear Monsieur,” said the mercer to himself. “PESTE!
Matters are going all right.”

“Should you know those doors again?”

“Yes.”

“Do you know the numbers?”

“Yes.”

“What are they?”

“No. 25 in the Rue de Vaugirard; 75 in the Rue de la Harpe.”

“That’s well,” said the cardinal.

At these words he took up a silver bell, and rang it; the officer
entered.

“Go,” said he, in a subdued voice, “and find Rochefort. Tell him to come
to me immediately, if he has returned.”

“The count is here,” said the officer, “and requests to speak with your
Eminence instantly.”

“Let him come in, then!” said the cardinal, quickly.

The officer sprang out of the apartment with that alacrity which all the
servants of the cardinal displayed in obeying him.

“To your Eminence!” murmured Bonacieux, rolling his eyes round in
astonishment.

Five seconds has scarcely elapsed after the disappearance of the
officer, when the door opened, and a new personage entered.

“It is he!” cried Bonacieux.

“He! What he?” asked the cardinal.

“The man who abducted my wife.”

The cardinal rang a second time. The officer reappeared.

“Place this man in the care of his guards again, and let him wait till I
send for him.”

“No, monseigneur, no, it is not he!” cried Bonacieux; “no, I was
deceived. This is quite another man, and does not resemble him at all.
Monsieur is, I am sure, an honest man.”

“Take away that fool!” said the cardinal.

The officer took Bonacieux by the arm, and led him into the antechamber,
where he found his two guards.

The newly introduced personage followed Bonacieux impatiently with his
eyes till he had gone out; and the moment the door closed, “They have
seen each other;” said he, approaching the cardinal eagerly.

“Who?” asked his Eminence.

“He and she.”

“The queen and the duke?” cried Richelieu.

“Yes.”

“Where?”

“At the Louvre.”

“Are you sure of it?”

“Perfectly sure.”

“Who told you of it?”

“Madame de Lannoy, who is devoted to your Eminence, as you know.”

“Why did she not let me know sooner?”

“Whether by chance or mistrust, the queen made Madame de Surgis sleep in
her chamber, and detained her all day.”

“Well, we are beaten! Now let us try to take our revenge.”

“I will assist you with all my heart, monseigneur; be assured of that.”

“How did it come about?”

“At half past twelve the queen was with her women--”

“Where?”

“In her bedchamber--”

“Go on.”

“When someone came and brought her a handkerchief from her laundress.”

“And then?”

“The queen immediately exhibited strong emotion; and despite the rouge
with which her face was covered evidently turned pale--”

“And then, and then?”

“She then arose, and with altered voice, ‘Ladies,’ said she, ‘wait for
me ten minutes, I shall soon return.’ She then opened the door of her
alcove, and went out.”

“Why did not Madame de Lannoy come and inform you instantly?”

“Nothing was certain; besides, her Majesty had said, ‘Ladies, wait for
me,’ and she did not dare to disobey the queen.”

“How long did the queen remain out of the chamber?”

“Three-quarters of an hour.”

“None of her women accompanied her?”

“Only Donna Estafania.”

“Did she afterward return?”

“Yes; but only to take a little rosewood casket, with her cipher upon
it, and went out again immediately.”

“And when she finally returned, did she bring that casket with her?”

“No.”

“Does Madame de Lannoy know what was in that casket?”

“Yes; the diamond studs which his Majesty gave the queen.”

“And she came back without this casket?”

“Yes.”

“Madame de Lannoy, then, is of opinion that she gave them to
Buckingham?”

“She is sure of it.”

“How can she be so?”

“In the course of the day Madame de Lannoy, in her quality of tire-woman
of the queen, looked for this casket, appeared uneasy at not finding it,
and at length asked information of the queen.”

“And then the queen?”

“The queen became exceedingly red, and replied that having in the
evening broken one of those studs, she had sent it to her goldsmith to
be repaired.”

“He must be called upon, and so ascertain if the thing be true or not.”

“I have just been with him.”

“And the goldsmith?”

“The goldsmith has heard nothing of it.”

“Well, well! Rochefort, all is not lost; and perhaps--perhaps everything
is for the best.”

“The fact is that I do not doubt your Eminence’s genius--”

“Will repair the blunders of his agent--is that it?”

“That is exactly what I was going to say, if your Eminence had let me
finish my sentence.”

“Meanwhile, do you know where the Duchesse de Chevreuse and the Duke of
Buckingham are now concealed?”

“No, monseigneur; my people could tell me nothing on that head.”

“But I know.”

“You, monseigneur?”

“Yes; or at least I guess. They were, one in the Rue de Vaugirard, No.
25; the other in the Rue de la Harpe, No. 75.”

“Does your Eminence command that they both be instantly arrested?”

“It will be too late; they will be gone.”

“But still, we can make sure that they are so.”

“Take ten men of my Guardsmen, and search the two houses thoroughly.”

“Instantly, monseigneur.” And Rochefort went hastily out of the
apartment.

The cardinal, being left alone, reflected for an instant and then rang
the bell a third time. The same officer appeared.

“Bring the prisoner in again,” said the cardinal.

M Bonacieux was introduced afresh, and upon a sign from the cardinal,
the officer retired.

“You have deceived me!” said the cardinal, sternly.

“I,” cried Bonacieux, “I deceive your Eminence!”

“Your wife, in going to Rue de Vaugirard and Rue de la Harpe, did not go
to find linen drapers.”

“Then why did she go, just God?”

“She went to meet the Duchesse de Chevreuse and the Duke of Buckingham.”

“Yes,” cried Bonacieux, recalling all his remembrances of the
circumstances, “yes, that’s it. Your Eminence is right. I told my wife
several times that it was surprising that linen drapers should live in
such houses as those, in houses that had no signs; but she always
laughed at me. Ah, monseigneur!” continued Bonacieux, throwing himself
at his Eminence’s feet, “ah, how truly you are the cardinal, the great
cardinal, the man of genius whom all the world reveres!”

The cardinal, however contemptible might be the triumph gained over so
vulgar a being as Bonacieux, did not the less enjoy it for an instant;
then, almost immediately, as if a fresh thought has occurred, a smile
played upon his lips, and he said, offering his hand to the mercer,
“Rise, my friend, you are a worthy man.”

“The cardinal has touched me with his hand! I have touched the hand of
the great man!” cried Bonacieux. “The great man has called me his
friend!”

“Yes, my friend, yes,” said the cardinal, with that paternal tone which
he sometimes knew how to assume, but which deceived none who knew him;
“and as you have been unjustly suspected, well, you must be indemnified.
Here, take this purse of a hundred pistoles, and pardon me.”

“I pardon you, monseigneur!” said Bonacieux, hesitating to take the
purse, fearing, doubtless, that this pretended gift was but a
pleasantry. “But you are able to have me arrested, you are able to have
me tortured, you are able to have me hanged; you are the master, and I
could not have the least word to say. Pardon you, monseigneur! You
cannot mean that!”

“Ah, my dear Monsieur Bonacieux, you are generous in this matter. I see
it and I thank you for it. Thus, then, you will take this bag, and you
will go away without being too malcontent.”

“I go away enchanted.”

“Farewell, then, or rather, AU REVOIR!”

“Whenever Monseigneur wishes, I shall be firmly at the orders of his
Eminence.”

“That will be often, be assured, for I have found your conversation
quite charming.”

“Oh! Monseigneur!”

“AU REVOIR, Monsieur Bonacieux, AU REVOIR.”

And the cardinal made him a sign with his hand, to which Bonacieux
replied by bowing to the ground. He then went out backward, and when he
was in the antechamber the cardinal heard him, in his enthusiasm, crying
aloud, “Long life to the Monseigneur! Long life to his Eminence! Long
life to the great cardinal!” The cardinal listened with a smile to this
vociferous manifestation of the feelings of M. Bonacieux; and then, when
Bonacieux’s cries were no longer audible, “Good!” said he, “that man
would henceforward lay down his life for me.” And the cardinal began to
examine with the greatest attention the map of La Rochelle, which, as we
have said, lay open on the desk, tracing with a pencil the line in which
the famous dyke was to pass which, eighteen months later, shut up the
port of the besieged city. As he was in the deepest of his strategic
meditations, the door opened, and Rochefort returned.

“Well?” said the cardinal, eagerly, rising with a promptitude which
proved the degree of importance he attached to the commission with which
he had charged the count.

“Well,” said the latter, “a young woman of about twenty-six or
twenty-eight years of age, and a man of from thirty-five to forty, have
indeed lodged at the two houses pointed out by your Eminence; but the
woman left last night, and the man this morning.”

“It was they!” cried the cardinal, looking at the clock; “and now it is
too late to have them pursued. The duchess is at Tours, and the duke at
Boulogne. It is in London they must be found.”

“What are your Eminence’s orders?”

“Not a word of what has passed. Let the queen remain in perfect
security; let her be ignorant that we know her secret. Let her believe
that we are in search of some conspiracy or other. Send me the keeper of
the seals, Seguier.”

“And that man, what has your Eminence done with him?”

“What man?” asked the cardinal.

“That Bonacieux.”

“I have done with him all that could be done. I have made him a spy upon
his wife.”

The Comte de Rochefort bowed like a man who acknowledges the superiority
of the master as great, and retired.

Left alone, the cardinal seated himself again and wrote a letter, which
he secured with his special seal. Then he rang. The officer entered for
the fourth time.

“Tell Vitray to come to me,” said he, “and tell him to get ready for a
journey.”

An instant after, the man he asked for was before him, booted and
spurred.

“Vitray,” said he, “you will go with all speed to London. You must not
stop an instant on the way. You will deliver this letter to Milady. Here
is an order for two hundred pistoles; call upon my treasurer and get the
money. You shall have as much again if you are back within six days, and
have executed your commission well.”

The messenger, without replying a single word, bowed, took the letter,
with the order for the two hundred pistoles, and retired.

Here is what the letter contained:

MILADY, Be at the first ball at which the Duke of Buckingham shall be
present. He will wear on his doublet twelve diamond studs; get as near
to him as you can, and cut off two.

As soon as these studs shall be in your possession, inform me.




15 MEN OF THE ROBE AND MEN OF THE SWORD


On the day after these events had taken place, Athos not having
reappeared, M. de Treville was informed by d’Artagnan and Porthos of the
circumstance. As to Aramis, he had asked for leave of absence for five
days, and was gone, it was said, to Rouen on family business.

M de Treville was the father of his soldiers. The lowest or the least
known of them, as soon as he assumed the uniform of the company, was as
sure of his aid and support as if he had been his own brother.

He repaired, then, instantly to the office of the LIEUTENANT-CRIMINEL.
The officer who commanded the post of the Red Cross was sent for, and by
successive inquiries they learned that Athos was then lodged in Fort
l’Eveque.

Athos had passed through all the examinations we have seen Bonacieux
undergo.

We were present at the scene in which the two captives were confronted
with each other. Athos, who had till that time said nothing for fear
that d’Artagnan, interrupted in his turn, should not have the time
necessary, from this moment declared that his name was Athos, and not
d’Artagnan. He added that he did not know either M. or Mme. Bonacieux;
that he had never spoken to the one or the other; that he had come, at
about ten o’clock in the evening, to pay a visit to his friend M.
d’Artagnan, but that till that hour he had been at M. de Treville’s,
where he had dined. “Twenty witnesses,” added he, “could attest the
fact”; and he named several distinguished gentlemen, and among them was
M. le Duc de la Tremouille.

The second commissary was as much bewildered as the first had been by
the simple and firm declaration of the Musketeer, upon whom he was
anxious to take the revenge which men of the robe like at all times to
gain over men of the sword; but the name of M. de Treville, and that of
M. de la Tremouille, commanded a little reflection.

Athos was then sent to the cardinal; but unfortunately the cardinal was
at the Louvre with the king.

It was precisely at this moment that M. de Treville, on leaving the
residence of the LIEUTENANT-CRIMINEL and the governor of Fort l’Eveque
without being able to find Athos, arrived at the palace.

As captain of the Musketeers, M. de Treville had the right of entry at
all times.

It is well known how violent the king’s prejudices were against the
queen, and how carefully these prejudices were kept up by the cardinal,
who in affairs of intrigue mistrusted women infinitely more than men.
One of the grand causes of this prejudice was the friendship of Anne of
Austria for Mme. de Chevreuse. These two women gave him more uneasiness
than the war with Spain, the quarrel with England, or the embarrassment
of the finances. In his eyes and to his conviction, Mme. de Chevreuse
not only served the queen in her political intrigues, but, what
tormented him still more, in her amorous intrigues.

At the first word the cardinal spoke of Mme. de Chevreuse--who, though
exiled to Tours and believed to be in that city, had come to Paris,
remained there five days, and outwitted the police--the king flew into a
furious passion. Capricious and unfaithful, the king wished to be called
Louis the Just and Louis the Chaste. Posterity will find a difficulty in
understanding this character, which history explains only by facts and
never by reason.

But when the cardinal added that not only Mme. de Chevreuse had been in
Paris, but still further, that the queen had renewed with her one of
those mysterious correspondences which at that time was named a CABAL;
when he affirmed that he, the cardinal, was about to unravel the most
closely twisted thread of this intrigue; that at the moment of arresting
in the very act, with all the proofs about her, the queen’s emissary to
the exiled duchess, a Musketeer had dared to interrupt the course of
justice violently, by falling sword in hand upon the honest men of the
law, charged with investigating impartially the whole affair in order to
place it before the eyes of the king--Louis XIII could not contain
himself, and he made a step toward the queen’s apartment with that pale
and mute indignation which, when it broke out, led this prince to the
commission of the most pitiless cruelty. And yet, in all this, the
cardinal had not yet said a word about the Duke of Buckingham.

At this instant M. de Treville entered, cool, polite, and in
irreproachable costume.

Informed of what had passed by the presence of the cardinal and the
alteration in the king’s countenance, M. de Treville felt himself
something like Samson before the Philistines.

Louis XIII had already placed his hand on the knob of the door; at the
noise of M. de Treville’s entrance he turned round. “You arrive in good
time, monsieur,” said the king, who, when his passions were raised to a
certain point, could not dissemble; “I have learned some fine things
concerning your Musketeers.”

“And I,” said Treville, coldly, “I have some pretty things to tell your
Majesty concerning these gownsmen.”

“What?” said the king, with hauteur.

“I have the honor to inform your Majesty,” continued M. de Treville, in
the same tone, “that a party of PROCUREURS, commissaries, and men of the
police--very estimable people, but very inveterate, as it appears,
against the uniform--have taken upon themselves to arrest in a house, to
lead away through the open street, and throw into Fort l’Eveque, all
upon an order which they have refused to show me, one of my, or rather
your Musketeers, sire, of irreproachable conduct, of an almost
illustrious reputation, and whom your Majesty knows favorably, Monsieur
Athos.”

“Athos,” said the king, mechanically; “yes, certainly I know that name.”

“Let your Majesty remember,” said Treville, “that Monsieur Athos is the
Musketeer who, in the annoying duel which you are acquainted with, had
the misfortune to wound Monsieur de Cahusac so seriously. A PROPOS,
monseigneur,” continued Treville, addressing the cardinal, “Monsieur de
Cahusac is quite recovered, is he not?”

“Thank you,” said the cardinal, biting his lips with anger.

“Athos, then, went to pay a visit to one of his friends absent at the
time,” continued Treville, “to a young Bearnais, a cadet in his
Majesty’s Guards, the company of Monsieur Dessessart, but scarcely had
he arrived at his friend’s and taken up a book, while waiting his
return, when a mixed crowd of bailiffs and soldiers came and laid siege
to the house, broke open several doors--”

The cardinal made the king a sign, which signified, “That was on account
of the affair about which I spoke to you.”

“We all know that,” interrupted the king; “for all that was done for our
service.”

“Then,” said Treville, “it was also for your Majesty’s service that one
of my Musketeers, who was innocent, has been seized, that he has been
placed between two guards like a malefactor, and that this gallant man,
who has ten times shed his blood in your Majesty’s service and is ready
to shed it again, has been paraded through the midst of an insolent
populace?”

“Bah!” said the king, who began to be shaken, “was it so managed?”

“Monsieur de Treville,” said the cardinal, with the greatest phlegm,
“does not tell your Majesty that this innocent Musketeer, this gallant
man, had only an hour before attacked, sword in hand, four commissaries
of inquiry, who were delegated by myself to examine into an affair of
the highest importance.”

“I defy your Eminence to prove it,” cried Treville, with his Gascon
freedom and military frankness; “for one hour before, Monsieur Athos,
who, I will confide it to your Majesty, is really a man of the highest
quality, did me the honor after having dined with me to be conversing in
the saloon of my hotel, with the Duc de la Tremouille and the Comte de
Chalus, who happened to be there.”

The king looked at the cardinal.

“A written examination attests it,” said the cardinal, replying aloud to
the mute interrogation of his Majesty; “and the ill-treated people have
drawn up the following, which I have the honor to present to your
Majesty.”

“And is the written report of the gownsmen to be placed in comparison
with the word of honor of a swordsman?” replied Treville haughtily.

“Come, come, Treville, hold your tongue,” said the king.

“If his Eminence entertains any suspicion against one of my Musketeers,”
said Treville, “the justice of Monsieur the Cardinal is so well known
that I demand an inquiry.”

“In the house in which the judicial inquiry was made,” continued the
impassive cardinal, “there lodges, I believe, a young Bearnais, a friend
of the Musketeer.”

“Your Eminence means Monsieur d’Artagnan.”

“I mean a young man whom you patronize, Monsieur de Treville.”

“Yes, your Eminence, it is the same.”

“Do you not suspect this young man of having given bad counsel?”

“To Athos, to a man double his age?” interrupted Treville. “No,
monseigneur. Besides, d’Artagnan passed the evening with me.”

“Well,” said the cardinal, “everybody seems to have passed the evening
with you.”

“Does your Eminence doubt my word?” said Treville, with a brow flushed
with anger.

“No, God forbid,” said the cardinal; “only, at what hour was he with
you?”

“Oh, as to that I can speak positively, your Eminence; for as he came in
I remarked that it was but half past nine by the clock, although I had
believed it to be later.”

“At what hour did he leave your hotel?”

“At half past ten--an hour after the event.”

“Well,” replied the cardinal, who could not for an instant suspect the
loyalty of Treville, and who felt that the victory was escaping him,
“well, but Athos WAS taken in the house in the Rue des Fossoyeurs.”

“Is one friend forbidden to visit another, or a Musketeer of my company
to fraternize with a Guard of Dessessart’s company?”

“Yes, when the house where he fraternizes is suspected.”

“That house is suspected, Treville,” said the king; “perhaps you did not
know it?”

“Indeed, sire, I did not. The house may be suspected; but I deny that it
is so in the part of it inhabited by Monsieur d’Artagnan, for I can
affirm, sire, if I can believe what he says, that there does not exist a
more devoted servant of your Majesty, or a more profound admirer of
Monsieur the Cardinal.”

“Was it not this d’Artagnan who wounded Jussac one day, in that
unfortunate encounter which took place near the Convent of the
Carmes-Dechausses?” asked the king, looking at the cardinal, who colored
with vexation.

“And the next day, Bernajoux. Yes, sire, yes, it is the same; and your
Majesty has a good memory.”

“Come, how shall we decide?” said the king.

“That concerns your Majesty more than me,” said the cardinal. “I should
affirm the culpability.”

“And I deny it,” said Treville. “But his Majesty has judges, and these
judges will decide.”

“That is best,” said the king. “Send the case before the judges; it is
their business to judge, and they shall judge.”

“Only,” replied Treville, “it is a sad thing that in the unfortunate
times in which we live, the purest life, the most incontestable virtue,
cannot exempt a man from infamy and persecution. The army, I will answer
for it, will be but little pleased at being exposed to rigorous
treatment on account of police affairs.”

The expression was imprudent; but M. de Treville launched it with
knowledge of his cause. He was desirous of an explosion, because in that
case the mine throws forth fire, and fire enlightens.

“Police affairs!” cried the king, taking up Treville’s words, “police
affairs! And what do you know about them, Monsieur? Meddle with your
Musketeers, and do not annoy me in this way. It appears, according to
your account, that if by mischance a Musketeer is arrested, France is in
danger. What a noise about a Musketeer! I would arrest ten of them,
VENTREBLEU, a hundred, even, all the company, and I would not allow a
whisper.”

“From the moment they are suspected by your Majesty,” said Treville,
“the Musketeers are guilty; therefore, you see me prepared to surrender
my sword--for after having accused my soldiers, there can be no doubt
that Monsieur the Cardinal will end by accusing me. It is best to
constitute myself at once a prisoner with Athos, who is already
arrested, and with d’Artagnan, who most probably will be.”

“Gascon-headed man, will you have done?” said the king.

“Sire,” replied Treville, without lowering his voice in the least,
“either order my Musketeer to be restored to me, or let him be tried.”

“He shall be tried,” said the cardinal.

“Well, so much the better; for in that case I shall demand of his
Majesty permission to plead for him.”

The king feared an outbreak.

“If his Eminence,” said he, “did not have personal motives--”

The cardinal saw what the king was about to say and interrupted him:

“Pardon me,” said he; “but the instant your Majesty considers me a
prejudiced judge, I withdraw.”

“Come,” said the king, “will you swear, by my father, that Athos was at
your residence during the event and that he took no part in it?”

“By your glorious father, and by yourself, whom I love and venerate
above all the world, I swear it.”

“Be so kind as to reflect, sire,” said the cardinal. “If we release the
prisoner thus, we shall never know the truth.”

“Athos may always be found,” replied Treville, “ready to answer, when it
shall please the gownsmen to interrogate him. He will not desert,
Monsieur the Cardinal, be assured of that; I will answer for him.”

“No, he will not desert,” said the king; “he can always be found, as
Treville says. Besides,” added he, lowering his voice and looking with a
suppliant air at the cardinal, “let us give them apparent security; that
is policy.”

This policy of Louis XIII made Richelieu smile.

“Order it as you please, sire; you possess the right of pardon.”

“The right of pardoning only applies to the guilty,” said Treville, who
was determined to have the last word, “and my Musketeer is innocent. It
is not mercy, then, that you are about to accord, sire, it is justice.”

“And he is in the Fort l’Eveque?” said the king.

“Yes, sire, in solitary confinement, in a dungeon, like the lowest
criminal.”

“The devil!” murmured the king; “what must be done?”

“Sign an order for his release, and all will be said,” replied the
cardinal. “I believe with your Majesty that Monsieur de Treville’s
guarantee is more than sufficient.”

Treville bowed very respectfully, with a joy that was not unmixed with
fear; he would have preferred an obstinate resistance on the part of the
cardinal to this sudden yielding.

The king signed the order for release, and Treville carried it away
without delay. As he was about to leave the presence, the cardinal gave
him a friendly smile, and said, “A perfect harmony reigns, sire, between
the leaders and the soldiers of your Musketeers, which must be
profitable for the service and honorable to all.”

“He will play me some dog’s trick or other, and that immediately,” said
Treville. “One has never the last word with such a man. But let us be
quick--the king may change his mind in an hour; and at all events it is
more difficult to replace a man in the Fort l’Eveque or the Bastille who
has got out, than to keep a prisoner there who is in.”

M de Treville made his entrance triumphantly into the Fort l’Eveque,
whence he delivered the Musketeer, whose peaceful indifference had not
for a moment abandoned him.

The first time he saw d’Artagnan, “You have come off well,” said he to
him; “there is your Jussac thrust paid for. There still remains that of
Bernajoux, but you must not be too confident.”

As to the rest, M. de Treville had good reason to mistrust the cardinal
and to think that all was not over, for scarcely had the captain of the
Musketeers closed the door after him, than his Eminence said to the
king, “Now that we are at length by ourselves, we will, if your Majesty
pleases, converse seriously. Sire, Buckingham has been in Paris five
days, and only left this morning.”




16 IN WHICH M. SEGUIER, KEEPER OF THE SEALS, LOOKS MORE THAN ONCE FOR
THE BELL


It is impossible to form an idea of the impression these few words made
upon Louis XIII. He grew pale and red alternately; and the cardinal saw
at once that he had recovered by a single blow all the ground he had
lost.

“Buckingham in Paris!” cried he, “and why does he come?”

“To conspire, no doubt, with your enemies, the Huguenots and the
Spaniards.”

“No, PARDIEU, no! To conspire against my honor with Madame de Chevreuse,
Madame de Longueville, and the Condes.”

“Oh, sire, what an idea! The queen is too virtuous; and besides, loves
your Majesty too well.”

“Woman is weak, Monsieur Cardinal,” said the king; “and as to loving me
much, I have my own opinion as to that love.”

“I not the less maintain,” said the cardinal, “that the Duke of
Buckingham came to Paris for a project wholly political.”

“And I am sure that he came for quite another purpose, Monsieur
Cardinal; but if the queen be guilty, let her tremble!”

“Indeed,” said the cardinal, “whatever repugnance I may have to
directing my mind to such a treason, your Majesty compels me to think of
it. Madame de Lannoy, whom, according to your Majesty’s command, I have
frequently interrogated, told me this morning that the night before last
her Majesty sat up very late, that this morning she wept much, and that
she was writing all day.”

“That’s it!” cried the king; “to him, no doubt. Cardinal, I must have
the queen’s papers.”

“But how to take them, sire? It seems to me that it is neither your
Majesty nor myself who can charge himself with such a mission.”

“How did they act with regard to the Marechale d’Ancre?” cried the king,
in the highest state of choler; “first her closets were thoroughly
searched, and then she herself.”

“The Marechale d’Ancre was no more than the Marechale d’Ancre. A
Florentine adventurer, sire, and that was all; while the august spouse
of your Majesty is Anne of Austria, Queen of France--that is to say, one
of the greatest princesses in the world.”

“She is not the less guilty, Monsieur Duke! The more she has forgotten
the high position in which she was placed, the more degrading is her
fall. Besides, I long ago determined to put an end to all these petty
intrigues of policy and love. She has near her a certain Laporte.”

“Who, I believe, is the mainspring of all this, I confess,” said the
cardinal.

“You think then, as I do, that she deceives me?” said the king.

“I believe, and I repeat it to your Majesty, that the queen conspires
against the power of the king, but I have not said against his honor.”

“And I--I tell you against both. I tell you the queen does not love me;
I tell you she loves another; I tell you she loves that infamous
Buckingham! Why did you not have him arrested while in Paris?”

“Arrest the Duke! Arrest the prime minister of King Charles I! Think of
it, sire! What a scandal! And if the suspicions of your Majesty, which I
still continue to doubt, should prove to have any foundation, what a
terrible disclosure, what a fearful scandal!”

“But as he exposed himself like a vagabond or a thief, he should have
been--”

Louis XIII stopped, terrified at what he was about to say, while
Richelieu, stretching out his neck, waited uselessly for the word which
had died on the lips of the king.

“He should have been--?”

“Nothing,” said the king, “nothing. But all the time he was in Paris,
you, of course, did not lose sight of him?”

“No, sire.”

“Where did he lodge?”

“Rue de la Harpe. No. 75.”

“Where is that?”

“By the side of the Luxembourg.”

“And you are certain that the queen and he did not see each other?”

“I believe the queen to have too high a sense of her duty, sire.”

“But they have corresponded; it is to him that the queen has been
writing all the day. Monsieur Duke, I must have those letters!”

“Sire, notwithstanding--”

“Monsieur Duke, at whatever price it may be, I will have them.”

“I would, however, beg your Majesty to observe--”

“Do you, then, also join in betraying me, Monsieur Cardinal, by thus
always opposing my will? Are you also in accord with Spain and England,
with Madame de Chevreuse and the queen?”

“Sire,” replied the cardinal, sighing, “I believed myself secure from
such a suspicion.”

“Monsieur Cardinal, you have heard me; I will have those letters.”

“There is but one way.”

“What is that?”

“That would be to charge Monsieur de Seguier, the keeper of the seals,
with this mission. The matter enters completely into the duties of the
post.”

“Let him be sent for instantly.”

“He is most likely at my hotel. I requested him to call, and when I came
to the Louvre I left orders if he came, to desire him to wait.”

“Let him be sent for instantly.”

“Your Majesty’s orders shall be executed; but--”

“But what?”

“But the queen will perhaps refuse to obey.”

“My orders?”

“Yes, if she is ignorant that these orders come from the king.”

“Well, that she may have no doubt on that head, I will go and inform her
myself.”

“Your Majesty will not forget that I have done everything in my power to
prevent a rupture.”

“Yes, Duke, yes, I know you are very indulgent toward the queen, too
indulgent, perhaps; we shall have occasion, I warn you, at some future
period to speak of that.”

“Whenever it shall please your Majesty; but I shall be always happy and
proud, sire, to sacrifice myself to the harmony which I desire to see
reign between you and the Queen of France.”

“Very well, Cardinal, very well; but, meantime, send for Monsieur the
Keeper of the Seals. I will go to the queen.”

And Louis XIII, opening the door of communication, passed into the
corridor which led from his apartments to those of Anne of Austria.

The queen was in the midst of her women--Mme. de Guitaut, Mme. de Sable,
Mme. de Montbazon, and Mme. de Guemene. In a corner was the Spanish
companion, Donna Estafania, who had followed her from Madrid. Mme.
Guemene was reading aloud, and everybody was listening to her with
attention with the exception of the queen, who had, on the contrary,
desired this reading in order that she might be able, while feigning to
listen, to pursue the thread of her own thoughts.

These thoughts, gilded as they were by a last reflection of love, were
not the less sad. Anne of Austria, deprived of the confidence of her
husband, pursued by the hatred of the cardinal, who could not pardon her
for having repulsed a more tender feeling, having before her eyes the
example of the queen-mother whom that hatred had tormented all her
life--though Marie de Medicis, if the memoirs of the time are to be
believed, had begun by according to the cardinal that sentiment which
Anne of Austria always refused him--Anne of Austria had seen her most
devoted servants fall around her, her most intimate confidants, her
dearest favorites. Like those unfortunate persons endowed with a fatal
gift, she brought misfortune upon everything she touched. Her friendship
was a fatal sign which called down persecution. Mme. de Chevreuse and
Mme. de Bernet were exiled, and Laporte did not conceal from his
mistress that he expected to be arrested every instant.

It was at the moment when she was plunged in the deepest and darkest of
these reflections that the door of the chamber opened, and the king
entered.

The reader hushed herself instantly. All the ladies rose, and there was
a profound silence. As to the king, he made no demonstration of
politeness, only stopping before the queen. “Madame,” said he, “you are
about to receive a visit from the chancellor, who will communicate
certain matters to you with which I have charged him.”

The unfortunate queen, who was constantly threatened with divorce,
exile, and trial even, turned pale under her rouge, and could not
refrain from saying, “But why this visit, sire? What can the chancellor
have to say to me that your Majesty could not say yourself?”

The king turned upon his heel without reply, and almost at the same
instant the captain of the Guards, M. de Guitant, announced the visit of
the chancellor.

When the chancellor appeared, the king had already gone out by another
door.

The chancellor entered, half smiling, half blushing. As we shall
probably meet with him again in the course of our history, it may be
well for our readers to be made at once acquainted with him.

This chancellor was a pleasant man. He was Des Roches le Masle, canon of
Notre Dame, who had formerly been valet of a bishop, who introduced him
to his Eminence as a perfectly devout man. The cardinal trusted him, and
therein found his advantage.

There are many stories related of him, and among them this. After a wild
youth, he had retired into a convent, there to expiate, at least for
some time, the follies of adolescence. On entering this holy place, the
poor penitent was unable to shut the door so close as to prevent the
passions he fled from entering with him. He was incessantly attacked by
them, and the superior, to whom he had confided this misfortune, wishing
as much as in him lay to free him from them, had advised him, in order
to conjure away the tempting demon, to have recourse to the bell rope,
and ring with all his might. At the denunciating sound, the monks would
be rendered aware that temptation was besieging a brother, and all the
community would go to prayers.

This advice appeared good to the future chancellor. He conjured the evil
spirit with abundance of prayers offered up by the monks. But the devil
does not suffer himself to be easily dispossessed from a place in which
he has fixed his garrison. In proportion as they redoubled the exorcisms
he redoubled the temptations; so that day and night the bell was ringing
full swing, announcing the extreme desire for mortification which the
penitent experienced.

The monks had no longer an instant of repose. By day they did nothing
but ascend and descend the steps which led to the chapel; at night, in
addition to complines and matins, they were further obliged to leap
twenty times out of their beds and prostrate themselves on the floor of
their cells.

It is not known whether it was the devil who gave way, or the monks who
grew tired; but within three months the penitent reappeared in the world
with the reputation of being the most terrible POSSESSED that ever
existed.

On leaving the convent he entered into the magistracy, became president
on the place of his uncle, embraced the cardinal’s party, which did not
prove want of sagacity, became chancellor, served his Eminence with zeal
in his hatred against the queen-mother and his vengeance against Anne of
Austria, stimulated the judges in the affair of Calais, encouraged the
attempts of M. de Laffemas, chief gamekeeper of France; then, at length,
invested with the entire confidence of the cardinal--a confidence which
he had so well earned--he received the singular commission for the
execution of which he presented himself in the queen’s apartments.

The queen was still standing when he entered; but scarcely had she
perceived him then she reseated herself in her armchair, and made a sign
to her women to resume their cushions and stools, and with an air of
supreme hauteur, said, “What do you desire, monsieur, and with what
object do you present yourself here?”

“To make, madame, in the name of the king, and without prejudice to the
respect which I have the honor to owe to your Majesty a close
examination into all your papers.”

“How, monsieur, an investigation of my papers--mine! Truly, this is an
indignity!”

“Be kind enough to pardon me, madame; but in this circumstance I am but
the instrument which the king employs. Has not his Majesty just left
you, and has he not himself asked you to prepare for this visit?”

“Search, then, monsieur! I am a criminal, as it appears. Estafania, give
up the keys of my drawers and my desks.”

For form’s sake the chancellor paid a visit to the pieces of furniture
named; but he well knew that it was not in a piece of furniture that the
queen would place the important letter she had written that day.

When the chancellor had opened and shut twenty times the drawers of the
secretaries, it became necessary, whatever hesitation he might
experience--it became necessary, I say, to come to the conclusion of the
affair; that is to say, to search the queen herself. The chancellor
advanced, therefore, toward Anne of Austria, and said with a very
perplexed and embarrassed air, “And now it remains for me to make the
principal examination.”

“What is that?” asked the queen, who did not understand, or rather was
not willing to understand.

“His majesty is certain that a letter has been written by you during the
day; he knows that it has not yet been sent to its address. This letter
is not in your table nor in your secretary; and yet this letter must be
somewhere.”

“Would you dare to lift your hand to your queen?” said Anne of Austria,
drawing herself up to her full height, and fixing her eyes upon the
chancellor with an expression almost threatening.

“I am a faithful subject of the king, madame, and all that his Majesty
commands I shall do.”

“Well, it is true!” said Anne of Austria; “and the spies of the cardinal
have served him faithfully. I have written a letter today; that letter
is not yet gone. The letter is here.” And the queen laid her beautiful
hand on her bosom.

“Then give me that letter, madame,” said the chancellor.

“I will give it to none but the king, monsieur,” said Anne.

“If the king had desired that the letter should be given to him, madame,
he would have demanded it of you himself. But I repeat to you, I am
charged with reclaiming it; and if you do not give it up--”

“Well?”

“He has, then, charged me to take it from you.”

“How! What do you say?”

“That my orders go far, madame; and that I am authorized to seek for the
suspected paper, even on the person of your Majesty.”

“What horror!” cried the queen.

“Be kind enough, then, madame, to act more compliantly.”

“The conduct is infamously violent! Do you know that, monsieur?”

“The king commands it, madame; excuse me.”

“I will not suffer it! No, no, I would rather die!” cried the queen, in
whom the imperious blood of Spain and Austria began to rise.

The chancellor made a profound reverence. Then, with the intention quite
patent of not drawing back a foot from the accomplishment of the
commission with which he was charged, and as the attendant of an
executioner might have done in the chamber of torture, he approached
Anne of Austria, from whose eyes at the same instant sprang tears of
rage.

The queen was, as we have said, of great beauty. The commission might
well be called delicate; and the king had reached, in his jealousy of
Buckingham, the point of not being jealous of anyone else.

Without doubt the chancellor Seguier looked about at that moment for the
rope of the famous bell; but not finding it he summoned his resolution,
and stretched forth his hands toward the place where the queen had
acknowledged the paper was to be found.

Anne of Austria took one step backward, became so pale that it might be
said she was dying, and leaning with her left hand upon a table behind
her to keep herself from falling, she with her right hand drew the paper
from her bosom and held it out to the keeper of the seals.

“There, monsieur, there is that letter!” cried the queen, with a broken
and trembling voice; “take it, and deliver me from your odious
presence.”

The chancellor, who, on his part, trembled with an emotion easily to be
conceived, took the letter, bowed to the ground, and retired. The door
was scarcely closed upon him, when the queen sank, half fainting, into
the arms of her women.

The chancellor carried the letter to the king without having read a
single word of it. The king took it with a trembling hand, looked for
the address, which was wanting, became very pale, opened it slowly, then
seeing by the first words that it was addressed to the King of Spain, he
read it rapidly.

It was nothing but a plan of attack against the cardinal. The queen
pressed her brother and the Emperor of Austria to appear to be wounded,
as they really were, by the policy of Richelieu--the eternal object of
which was the abasement of the house of Austria--to declare war against
France, and as a condition of peace, to insist upon the dismissal of the
cardinal; but as to love, there was not a single word about it in all
the letter.

The king, quite delighted, inquired if the cardinal was still at the
Louvre; he was told that his Eminence awaited the orders of his Majesty
in the business cabinet.

The king went straight to him.

“There, Duke,” said he, “you were right and I was wrong. The whole
intrigue is political, and there is not the least question of love in
this letter; but, on the other hand, there is abundant question of you.”

The cardinal took the letter, and read it with the greatest attention;
then, when he had arrived at the end of it, he read it a second time.
“Well, your Majesty,” said he, “you see how far my enemies go; they
menace you with two wars if you do not dismiss me. In your place, in
truth, sire, I should yield to such powerful instance; and on my part,
it would be a real happiness to withdraw from public affairs.”

“What say you, Duke?”

“I say, sire, that my health is sinking under these excessive struggles
and these never-ending labors. I say that according to all probability I
shall not be able to undergo the fatigues of the siege of La Rochelle,
and that it would be far better that you should appoint there either
Monsieur de Conde, Monsieur de Bassopierre, or some valiant gentleman
whose business is war, and not me, who am a churchman, and who am
constantly turned aside for my real vocation to look after matters for
which I have no aptitude. You would be the happier for it at home, sire,
and I do not doubt you would be the greater for it abroad.”

“Monsieur Duke,” said the king, “I understand you. Be satisfied, all who
are named in that letter shall be punished as they deserve, even the
queen herself.”

“What do you say, sire? God forbid that the queen should suffer the
least inconvenience or uneasiness on my account! She has always believed
me, sire, to be her enemy; although your Majesty can bear witness that I
have always taken her part warmly, even against you. Oh, if she betrayed
your Majesty on the side of your honor, it would be quite another thing,
and I should be the first to say, ‘No grace, sire--no grace for the
guilty!’ Happily, there is nothing of the kind, and your Majesty has
just acquired a new proof of it.”

“That is true, Monsieur Cardinal,” said the king, “and you were right,
as you always are; but the queen, not the less, deserves all my anger.”

“It is you, sire, who have now incurred hers. And even if she were to be
seriously offended, I could well understand it; your Majesty has treated
her with a severity--”

“It is thus I will always treat my enemies and yours, Duke, however high
they may be placed, and whatever peril I may incur in acting severely
toward them.”

“The queen is my enemy, but is not yours, sire; on the contrary, she is
a devoted, submissive, and irreproachable wife. Allow me, then, sire, to
intercede for her with your Majesty.”

“Let her humble herself, then, and come to me first.”

“On the contrary, sire, set the example. You have committed the first
wrong, since it was you who suspected the queen.”

“What! I make the first advances?” said the king. “Never!”

“Sire, I entreat you to do so.”

“Besides, in what manner can I make advances first?”

“By doing a thing which you know will be agreeable to her.”

“What is that?”

“Give a ball; you know how much the queen loves dancing. I will answer
for it, her resentment will not hold out against such an attention.”

“Monsieur Cardinal, you know that I do not like worldly pleasures.”

“The queen will only be the more grateful to you, as she knows your
antipathy for that amusement; besides, it will be an opportunity for her
to wear those beautiful diamonds which you gave her recently on her
birthday and with which she has since had no occasion to adorn herself.”

“We shall see, Monsieur Cardinal, we shall see,” said the king, who, in
his joy at finding the queen guilty of a crime which he cared little
about, and innocent of a fault of which he had great dread, was ready to
make up all differences with her, “we shall see, but upon my honor, you
are too indulgent toward her.”

“Sire,” said the cardinal, “leave severity to your ministers. Clemency
is a royal virtue; employ it, and you will find that you derive
advantage therein.”

Thereupon the cardinal, hearing the clock strike eleven, bowed low,
asking permission of the king to retire, and supplicating him to come to
a good understanding with the queen.

Anne of Austria, who, in consequence of the seizure of her letter,
expected reproaches, was much astonished the next day to see the king
make some attempts at reconciliation with her. Her first movement was
repellent. Her womanly pride and her queenly dignity had both been so
cruelly offended that she could not come round at the first advance;
but, overpersuaded by the advice of her women, she at last had the
appearance of beginning to forget. The king took advantage of this
favorable moment to tell her that he had the intention of shortly giving
a fete.

A fete was so rare a thing for poor Anne of Austria that at this
announcement, as the cardinal had predicted, the last trace of her
resentment disappeared, if not from her heart, at least from her
countenance. She asked upon what day this fete would take place, but the
king replied that he must consult the cardinal upon that head.

Indeed, every day the king asked the cardinal when this fete should take
place; and every day the cardinal, under some pretext, deferred fixing
it. Ten days passed away thus.

On the eighth day after the scene we have described, the cardinal
received a letter with the London stamp which only contained these
lines: “I have them; but I am unable to leave London for want of money.
Send me five hundred pistoles, and four or five days after I have
received them I shall be in Paris.”

On the same day the cardinal received this letter the king put his
customary question to him.

Richelieu counted on his fingers, and said to himself, “She will arrive,
she says, four or five days after having received the money. It will
require four or five days for the transmission of the money, four or
five days for her to return; that makes ten days. Now, allowing for
contrary winds, accidents, and a woman’s weakness, there are twelve
days.”

“Well, Monsieur Duke,” said the king, “have you made your calculations?”

“Yes, sire. Today is the twentieth of September. The aldermen of the
city give a fete on the third of October. That will fall in wonderfully
well; you will not appear to have gone out of your way to please the
queen.”

Then the cardinal added, “A PROPOS, sire, do not forget to tell her
Majesty the evening before the fete that you should like to see how her
diamond studs become her.”




17 BONACIEUX AT HOME


It was the second time the cardinal had mentioned these diamond studs to
the king. Louis XIII was struck with this insistence, and began to fancy
that this recommendation concealed some mystery.

More than once the king had been humiliated by the cardinal, whose
police, without having yet attained the perfection of the modern police,
were excellent, being better informed than himself, even upon what was
going on in his own household. He hoped, then, in a conversation with
Anne of Austria, to obtain some information from that conversation, and
afterward to come upon his Eminence with some secret which the cardinal
either knew or did not know, but which, in either case, would raise him
infinitely in the eyes of his minister.

He went then to the queen, and according to custom accosted her with
fresh menaces against those who surrounded her. Anne of Austria lowered
her head, allowed the torrent to flow on without replying, hoping that
it would cease of itself; but this was not what Louis XIII meant. Louis
XIII wanted a discussion from which some light or other might break,
convinced as he was that the cardinal had some afterthought and was
preparing for him one of those terrible surprises which his Eminence was
so skillful in getting up. He arrived at this end by his persistence in
accusation.

“But,” cried Anne of Austria, tired of these vague attacks, “but, sire,
you do not tell me all that you have in your heart. What have I done,
then? Let me know what crime I have committed. It is impossible that
your Majesty can make all this ado about a letter written to my
brother.”

The king, attacked in a manner so direct, did not know what to answer;
and he thought that this was the moment for expressing the desire which
he was not going to have made until the evening before the fete.

“Madame,” said he, with dignity, “there will shortly be a ball at the
Hotel de Ville. I wish, in order to honor our worthy aldermen, you
should appear in ceremonial costume, and above all, ornamented with the
diamond studs which I gave you on your birthday. That is my answer.”

The answer was terrible. Anne of Austria believed that Louis XIII knew
all, and that the cardinal had persuaded him to employ this long
dissimulation of seven or eight days, which, likewise, was
characteristic. She became excessively pale, leaned her beautiful hand
upon a CONSOLE, which hand appeared then like one of wax, and looking at
the king with terror in her eyes, she was unable to reply by a single
syllable.

“You hear, madame,” said the king, who enjoyed the embarrassment to its
full extent, but without guessing the cause. “You hear, madame?”

“Yes, sire, I hear,” stammered the queen.

“You will appear at this ball?”

“Yes.”

“With those studs?”

“Yes.”

The queen’s paleness, if possible, increased; the king perceived it, and
enjoyed it with that cold cruelty which was one of the worst sides of
his character.

“Then that is agreed,” said the king, “and that is all I had to say to
you.”

“But on what day will this ball take place?” asked Anne of Austria.

Louis XIII felt instinctively that he ought not to reply to this
question, the queen having put it in an almost dying voice.

“Oh, very shortly, madame,” said he; “but I do not precisely recollect
the date of the day. I will ask the cardinal.”

“It was the cardinal, then, who informed you of this fete?”

“Yes, madame,” replied the astonished king; “but why do you ask that?”

“It was he who told you to invite me to appear with these studs?”

“That is to say, madame--”

“It was he, sire, it was he!”

“Well, and what does it signify whether it was he or I? Is there any
crime in this request?”

“No, sire.”

“Then you will appear?”

“Yes, sire.”

“That is well,” said the king, retiring, “that is well; I count upon
it.”

The queen made a curtsy, less from etiquette than because her knees were
sinking under her. The king went away enchanted.

“I am lost,” murmured the queen, “lost!--for the cardinal knows all, and
it is he who urges on the king, who as yet knows nothing but will soon
know everything. I am lost! My God, my God, my God!”

She knelt upon a cushion and prayed, with her head buried between her
palpitating arms.

In fact, her position was terrible. Buckingham had returned to London;
Mme. de Chevreuse was at Tours. More closely watched than ever, the
queen felt certain, without knowing how to tell which, that one of her
women had betrayed her. Laporte could not leave the Louvre; she had not
a soul in the world in whom she could confide. Thus, while contemplating
the misfortune which threatened her and the abandonment in which she was
left, she broke out into sobs and tears.

“Can I be of service to your Majesty?” said all at once a voice full of
sweetness and pity.

The queen turned sharply round, for there could be no deception in the
expression of that voice; it was a friend who spoke thus.

In fact, at one of the doors which opened into the queen’s apartment
appeared the pretty Mme. Bonacieux. She had been engaged in arranging
the dresses and linen in a closet when the king entered; she could not
get out and had heard all.

The queen uttered a piercing cry at finding herself surprised--for in
her trouble she did not at first recognize the young woman who had been
given to her by Laporte.

“Oh, fear nothing, madame!” said the young woman, clasping her hands and
weeping herself at the queen’s sorrows; “I am your Majesty’s, body and
soul, and however far I may be from you, however inferior may be my
position, I believe I have discovered a means of extricating your
Majesty from your trouble.”

“You, oh, heaven, you!” cried the queen; “but look me in the face. I am
betrayed on all sides. Can I trust in you?”

“Oh, madame!” cried the young woman, falling on her knees; “upon my
soul, I am ready to die for your Majesty!”

This expression sprang from the very bottom of the heart, and, like the
first, there was no mistaking it.

“Yes,” continued Mme. Bonacieux, “yes, there are traitors here; but by
the holy name of the Virgin, I swear that no one is more devoted to your
Majesty than I am. Those studs which the king speaks of, you gave them
to the Duke of Buckingham, did you not? Those studs were enclosed in a
little rosewood box which he held under his arm? Am I deceived? Is it
not so, madame?”

“Oh, my God, my God!” murmured the queen, whose teeth chattered with
fright.

“Well, those studs,” continued Mme. Bonacieux, “we must have them back
again.”

“Yes, without doubt, it is necessary,” cried the queen; “but how am I to
act? How can it be effected?”

“Someone must be sent to the duke.”

“But who, who? In whom can I trust?”

“Place confidence in me, madame; do me that honor, my queen, and I will
find a messenger.”

“But I must write.”

“Oh, yes; that is indispensable. Two words from the hand of your Majesty
and your private seal.”

“But these two words would bring about my condemnation, divorce, exile!”

“Yes, if they fell into infamous hands. But I will answer for these two
words being delivered to their address.”

“Oh, my God! I must then place my life, my honor, my reputation, in your
hands?”

“Yes, yes, madame, you must; and I will save them all.”

“But how? Tell me at least the means.”

“My husband had been at liberty these two or three days. I have not yet
had time to see him again. He is a worthy, honest man who entertains
neither love nor hatred for anybody. He will do anything I wish. He will
set out upon receiving an order from me, without knowing what he
carries, and he will carry your Majesty’s letter, without even knowing
it is from your Majesty, to the address which is on it.”

The queen took the two hands of the young woman with a burst of emotion,
gazed at her as if to read her very heart, and, seeing nothing but
sincerity in her beautiful eyes, embraced her tenderly.

“Do that,” cried she, “and you will have saved my life, you will have
saved my honor!”

“Do not exaggerate the service I have the happiness to render your
Majesty. I have nothing to save for your Majesty; you are only the
victim of perfidious plots.”

“That is true, that is true, my child,” said the queen, “you are right.”

“Give me then, that letter, madame; time presses.”

The queen ran to a little table, on which were ink, paper, and pens. She
wrote two lines, sealed the letter with her private seal, and gave it to
Mme. Bonacieux.

“And now,” said the queen, “we are forgetting one very necessary thing.”

“What is that, madame?”

“Money.”

Mme. Bonacieux blushed.

“Yes, that is true,” said she, “and I will confess to your Majesty that
my husband--”

“Your husband has none. Is that what you would say?”

“He has some, but he is very avaricious; that is his fault.
Nevertheless, let not your Majesty be uneasy, we will find means.”

“And I have none, either,” said the queen. Those who have read the
MEMOIRS of Mme. de Motteville will not be astonished at this reply. “But
wait a minute.”

Anne of Austria ran to her jewel case.

“Here,” said she, “here is a ring of great value, as I have been
assured. It came from my brother, the King of Spain. It is mine, and I
am at liberty to dispose of it. Take this ring; raise money with it, and
let your husband set out.”

“In an hour you shall be obeyed.”

“You see the address,” said the queen, speaking so low that Mme.
Bonacieux could hardly hear what she said, “To my Lord Duke of
Buckingham, London.”

“The letter shall be given to himself.”

“Generous girl!” cried Anne of Austria.

Mme. Bonacieux kissed the hands of the queen, concealed the paper in the
bosom of her dress, and disappeared with the lightness of a bird.

Ten minutes afterward she was at home. As she told the queen, she had
not seen her husband since his liberation; she was ignorant of the
change that had taken place in him with respect to the cardinal--a
change which had since been strengthened by two or three visits from the
Comte de Rochefort, who had become the best friend of Bonacieux, and had
persuaded him, without much trouble, that no culpable sentiments had
prompted the abduction of his wife, but that it was only a political
precaution.

She found M. Bonacieux alone; the poor man was recovering with
difficulty the order in his house, in which he had found most of the
furniture broken and the closets nearly emptied--justice not being one
of the three things which King Solomon names as leaving no traces of
their passage. As to the servant, she had run away at the moment of her
master’s arrest. Terror had had such an effect upon the poor girl that
she had never ceased walking from Paris till she reached Burgundy, her
native place.

The worthy mercer had, immediately upon re-entering his house, informed
his wife of his happy return, and his wife had replied by congratulating
him, and telling him that the first moment she could steal from her
duties should be devoted to paying him a visit.

This first moment had been delayed five days, which, under any other
circumstances, might have appeared rather long to M. Bonacieux; but he
had, in the visit he had made to the cardinal and in the visits
Rochefort had made him, ample subjects for reflection, and as everybody
knows, nothing makes time pass more quickly than reflection.

This was the more so because Bonacieux’s reflections were all
rose-colored. Rochefort called him his friend, his dear Bonacieux, and
never ceased telling him that the cardinal had a great respect for him.
The mercer fancied himself already on the high road to honors and
fortune.

On her side Mme. Bonacieux had also reflected; but, it must be admitted,
upon something widely different from ambition. In spite of herself her
thoughts constantly reverted to that handsome young man who was so brave
and appeared to be so much in love. Married at eighteen to M. Bonacieux,
having always lived among her husband’s friends--people little capable
of inspiring any sentiment whatever in a young woman whose heart was
above her position--Mme. Bonacieux had remained insensible to vulgar
seductions; but at this period the title of gentleman had great
influence with the citizen class, and d’Artagnan was a gentleman.
Besides, he wore the uniform of the Guards, which, next to that of the
Musketeers, was most admired by the ladies. He was, we repeat, handsome,
young, and bold; he spoke of love like a man who did love and was
anxious to be loved in return. There was certainly enough in all this to
turn a head only twenty-three years old, and Mme. Bonacieux had just
attained that happy period of life.

The couple, then, although they had not seen each other for eight days,
and during that time serious events had taken place in which both were
concerned, accosted each other with a degree of preoccupation.
Nevertheless, Bonacieux manifested real joy, and advanced toward his
wife with open arms. Madame Bonacieux presented her cheek to him.

“Let us talk a little,” said she.

“How!” said Bonacieux, astonished.

“Yes, I have something of the highest importance to tell you.”

“True,” said he, “and I have some questions sufficiently serious to put
to you. Describe to me your abduction, I pray you.”

“Oh, that’s of no consequence just now,” said Mme. Bonacieux.

“And what does it concern, then--my captivity?”

“I heard of it the day it happened; but as you were not guilty of any
crime, as you were not guilty of any intrigue, as you, in short, knew
nothing that could compromise yourself or anybody else, I attached no
more importance to that event than it merited.”

“You speak very much at your ease, madame,” said Bonacieux, hurt at the
little interest his wife showed in him. “Do you know that I was plunged
during a day and night in a dungeon of the Bastille?”

“Oh, a day and night soon pass away. Let us return to the object that
brings me here.”

“What, that which brings you home to me? Is it not the desire of seeing
a husband again from whom you have been separated for a week?” asked the
mercer, piqued to the quick.

“Yes, that first, and other things afterward.”

“Speak.”

“It is a thing of the highest interest, and upon which our future
fortune perhaps depends.”

“The complexion of our fortune has changed very much since I saw you,
Madame Bonacieux, and I should not be astonished if in the course of a
few months it were to excite the envy of many folks.”

“Yes, particularly if you follow the instructions I am about to give
you.”

“Me?”

“Yes, you. There is good and holy action to be performed, monsieur, and
much money to be gained at the same time.”

Mme. Bonacieux knew that in talking of money to her husband, she took
him on his weak side. But a man, were he even a mercer, when he had
talked for ten minutes with Cardinal Richelieu, is no longer the same
man.

“Much money to be gained?” said Bonacieux, protruding his lip.

“Yes, much.”

“About how much?”

“A thousand pistoles, perhaps.”

“What you demand of me is serious, then?”

“It is indeed.”

“What must be done?”

“You must go away immediately. I will give you a paper which you must
not part with on any account, and which you will deliver into the proper
hands.”

“And whither am I to go?”

“To London.”

“I go to London? Go to! You jest! I have no business in London.”

“But others wish that you should go there.”

“But who are those others? I warn you that I will never again work in
the dark, and that I will know not only to what I expose myself, but for
whom I expose myself.”

“An illustrious person sends you; an illustrious person awaits you. The
recompense will exceed your expectations; that is all I promise you.”

“More intrigues! Nothing but intrigues! Thank you, madame, I am aware of
them now; Monsieur Cardinal has enlightened me on that head.”

“The cardinal?” cried Mme. Bonacieux. “Have you seen the cardinal?”

“He sent for me,” answered the mercer, proudly.

“And you responded to his bidding, you imprudent man?”

“Well, I can’t say I had much choice of going or not going, for I was
taken to him between two guards. It is true also, that as I did not then
know his Eminence, if I had been able to dispense with the visit, I
should have been enchanted.”

“He ill-treated you, then; he threatened you?”

“He gave me his hand, and called me his friend. His friend! Do you hear
that, madame? I am the friend of the great cardinal!”

“Of the great cardinal!”

“Perhaps you would contest his right to that title, madame?”

“I would contest nothing; but I tell you that the favor of a minister is
ephemeral, and that a man must be mad to attach himself to a minister.
There are powers above his which do not depend upon a man or the issue
of an event; it is to these powers we should rally.”

“I am sorry for it, madame, but I acknowledge no other power but that of
the great man whom I have the honor to serve.”

“You serve the cardinal?”

“Yes, madame; and as his servant, I will not allow you to be concerned
in plots against the safety of the state, or to serve the intrigues of a
woman who is not French and who has a Spanish heart. Fortunately we have
the great cardinal; his vigilant eye watches over and penetrates to the
bottom of the heart.”

Bonacieux was repeating, word for word, a sentence which he had heard
from the Comte de Rochefort; but the poor wife, who had reckoned on her
husband, and who, in that hope, had answered for him to the queen, did
not tremble the less, both at the danger into which she had nearly cast
herself and at the helpless state to which she was reduced.
Nevertheless, knowing the weakness of her husband, and more particularly
his cupidity, she did not despair of bringing him round to her purpose.

“Ah, you are a cardinalist, then, monsieur, are you?” cried she; “and
you serve the party of those who maltreat your wife and insult your
queen?”

“Private interests are as nothing before the interests of all. I am for
those who save the state,” said Bonacieux, emphatically.

“And what do you know about the state you talk of?” said Mme. Bonacieux,
shrugging her shoulders. “Be satisfied with being a plain,
straightforward citizen, and turn to that side which offers the most
advantages.”

“Eh, eh!” said Bonacieux, slapping a plump, round bag, which returned a
sound a money; “what do you think of this, Madame Preacher?”

“Whence comes that money?”

“You do not guess?”

“From the cardinal?”

“From him, and from my friend the Comte de Rochefort.”

“The Comte de Rochefort! Why, it was he who carried me off!”

“That may be, madame!”

“And you receive silver from that man?”

“Have you not said that that abduction was entirely political?”

“Yes; but that abduction had for its object the betrayal of my mistress,
to draw from me by torture confessions that might compromise the honor,
and perhaps the life, of my august mistress.”

“Madame,” replied Bonacieux, “your august mistress is a perfidious
Spaniard, and what the cardinal does is well done.”

“Monsieur,” said the young woman, “I know you to be cowardly,
avaricious, and foolish, but I never till now believed you infamous!”

“Madame,” said Bonacieux, who had never seen his wife in a passion, and
who recoiled before this conjugal anger, “madame, what do you say?”

“I say you are a miserable creature!” continued Mme. Bonacieux, who saw
she was regaining some little influence over her husband. “You meddle
with politics, do you--and still more, with cardinalist politics? Why,
you sell yourself, body and soul, to the demon, the devil, for money!”

“No, to the cardinal.”

“It’s the same thing,” cried the young woman. “Who calls Richelieu calls
Satan.”

“Hold your tongue, hold your tongue, madame! You may be overheard.”

“Yes, you are right; I should be ashamed for anyone to know your
baseness.”

“But what do you require of me, then? Let us see.”

“I have told you. You must depart instantly, monsieur. You must
accomplish loyally the commission with which I deign to charge you, and
on that condition I pardon everything, I forget everything; and what is
more,” and she held out her hand to him, “I restore my love.”

Bonacieux was cowardly and avaricious, but he loved his wife. He was
softened. A man of fifty cannot long bear malice with a wife of
twenty-three. Mme. Bonacieux saw that he hesitated.

“Come! Have you decided?” said she.

“But, my dear love, reflect a little upon what you require of me. London
is far from Paris, very far, and perhaps the commission with which you
charge me is not without dangers?”

“What matters it, if you avoid them?”

“Hold, Madame Bonacieux,” said the mercer, “hold! I positively refuse;
intrigues terrify me. I have seen the Bastille. My! Whew! That’s a
frightful place, that Bastille! Only to think of it makes my flesh
crawl. They threatened me with torture. Do you know what torture is?
Wooden points that they stick in between your legs till your bones stick
out! No, positively I will not go. And, MORBLEU, why do you not go
yourself? For in truth, I think I have hitherto been deceived in you. I
really believe you are a man, and a violent one, too.”

“And you, you are a woman--a miserable woman, stupid and brutal. You are
afraid, are you? Well, if you do not go this very instant, I will have
you arrested by the queen’s orders, and I will have you placed in the
Bastille which you dread so much.”

Bonacieux fell into a profound reflection. He weighed the two angers in
his brain--that of the cardinal and that of the queen; that of the
cardinal predominated enormously.

“Have me arrested on the part of the queen,” said he, “and I--I will
appeal to his Eminence.”

At once Mme. Bonacieux saw that she had gone too far, and she was
terrified at having communicated so much. She for a moment contemplated
with fright that stupid countenance, impressed with the invincible
resolution of a fool that is overcome by fear.

“Well, be it so!” said she. “Perhaps, when all is considered, you are
right. In the long run, a man knows more about politics than a woman,
particularly such as, like you, Monsieur Bonacieux, have conversed with
the cardinal. And yet it is very hard,” added she, “that a man upon
whose affection I thought I might depend, treats me thus unkindly and
will not comply with any of my fancies.”

“That is because your fancies go too far,” replied the triumphant
Bonacieux, “and I mistrust them.”

“Well, I will give it up, then,” said the young woman, sighing. “It is
well as it is; say no more about it.”

“At least you should tell me what I should have to do in London,”
replied Bonacieux, who remembered a little too late that Rochefort had
desired him to endeavor to obtain his wife’s secrets.

“It is of no use for you to know anything about it,” said the young
woman, whom an instinctive mistrust now impelled to draw back. “It was
about one of those purchases that interest women--a purchase by which
much might have been gained.”

But the more the young woman excused herself, the more important
Bonacieux thought the secret which she declined to confide to him. He
resolved then to hasten immediately to the residence of the Comte de
Rochefort, and tell him that the queen was seeking for a messenger to
send to London.

“Pardon me for quitting you, my dear Madame Bonacieux,” said he; “but,
not knowing you would come to see me, I had made an engagement with a
friend. I shall soon return; and if you will wait only a few minutes for
me, as soon as I have concluded my business with that friend, as it is
growing late, I will come back and reconduct you to the Louvre.”

“Thank you, monsieur, you are not brave enough to be of any use to me
whatever,” replied Mme. Bonacieux. “I shall return very safely to the
Louvre all alone.”

“As you please, Madame Bonacieux,” said the ex-mercer. “Shall I see you
again soon?”

“Next week I hope my duties will afford me a little liberty, and I will
take advantage of it to come and put things in order here, as they must
necessarily be much deranged.”

“Very well; I shall expect you. You are not angry with me?”

“Not the least in the world.”

“Till then, then?”

“Till then.”

Bonacieux kissed his wife’s hand, and set off at a quick pace.

“Well,” said Mme. Bonacieux, when her husband had shut the street door
and she found herself alone; “that imbecile lacked but one thing: to
become a cardinalist. And I, who have answered for him to the queen--I,
who have promised my poor mistress--ah, my God, my God! She will take me
for one of those wretches with whom the palace swarms and who are placed
about her as spies! Ah, Monsieur Bonacieux, I never did love you much,
but now it is worse than ever. I hate you, and on my word you shall pay
for this!”

At the moment she spoke these words a rap on the ceiling made her raise
her head, and a voice which reached her through the ceiling cried, “Dear
Madame Bonacieux, open for me the little door on the alley, and I will
come down to you.”




18 LOVER AND HUSBAND


Ah, Madame,” said d’Artagnan, entering by the door which the young woman
opened for him, “allow me to tell you that you have a bad sort of a
husband.”

“You have, then, overheard our conversation?” asked Mme. Bonacieux,
eagerly, and looking at d’Artagnan with disquiet.

“The whole.”

“But how, my God?”

“By a mode of proceeding known to myself, and by which I likewise
overheard the more animated conversation which he had with the
cardinal’s police.”

“And what did you understand by what we said?”

“A thousand things. In the first place, that, unfortunately, your
husband is a simpleton and a fool; in the next place, you are in
trouble, of which I am very glad, as it gives me an opportunity of
placing myself at your service, and God knows I am ready to throw myself
into the fire for you; finally, that the queen wants a brave,
intelligent, devoted man to make a journey to London for her. I have at
least two of the three qualities you stand in need of, and here I am.”

Mme. Bonacieux made no reply; but her heart beat with joy and secret
hope shone in her eyes.

“And what guarantee will you give me,” asked she, “if I consent to
confide this message to you?”

“My love for you. Speak! Command! What is to be done?”

“My God, my God!” murmured the young woman, “ought I to confide such a
secret to you, monsieur? You are almost a boy.”

“I see that you require someone to answer for me?”

“I admit that would reassure me greatly.”

“Do you know Athos?”

“No.”

“Porthos?”

“No.”

“Aramis?”

“No. Who are these gentleman?”

“Three of the king’s Musketeers. Do you know Monsieur de Treville, their
captain?”

“Oh, yes, him! I know him; not personally, but from having heard the
queen speak of him more than once as a brave and loyal gentleman.”

“You do not fear lest he should betray you to the cardinal?”

“Oh, no, certainly not!”

“Well, reveal your secret to him, and ask him whether, however
important, however valuable, however terrible it may be, you may not
confide it to me.”

“But this secret is not mine, and I cannot reveal it in this manner.”

“You were about to confide it to Monsieur Bonacieux,” said d’Artagnan,
with chagrin.

“As one confides a letter to the hollow of a tree, to the wing of a
pigeon, to the collar of a dog.”

“And yet, me--you see plainly that I love you.”

“You say so.”

“I am an honorable man.”

“You say so.”

“I am a gallant fellow.”

“I believe it.”

“I am brave.”

“Oh, I am sure of that!”

“Then, put me to the proof.”

Mme. Bonacieux looked at the young man, restrained for a minute by a
last hesitation; but there was such an ardor in his eyes, such
persuasion in his voice, that she felt herself constrained to confide in
him. Besides, she found herself in circumstances where everything must
be risked for the sake of everything. The queen might be as much injured
by too much reticence as by too much confidence; and--let us admit
it--the involuntary sentiment which she felt for her young protector
decided her to speak.

“Listen,” said she; “I yield to your protestations, I yield to your
assurances. But I swear to you, before God who hears us, that if you
betray me, and my enemies pardon me, I will kill myself, while accusing
you of my death.”

“And I--I swear to you before God, madame,” said d’Artagnan, “that if I
am taken while accomplishing the orders you give me, I will die sooner
than do anything that may compromise anyone.”

Then the young woman confided in him the terrible secret of which chance
had already communicated to him a part in front of the Samaritaine. This
was their mutual declaration of love.

D’Artagnan was radiant with joy and pride. This secret which he
possessed, this woman whom he loved! Confidence and love made him a
giant.

“I go,” said he; “I go at once.”

“How, you will go!” said Mme. Bonacieux; “and your regiment, your
captain?”

“By my soul, you had made me forget all that, dear Constance! Yes, you
are right; a furlough is needful.”

“Still another obstacle,” murmured Mme. Bonacieux, sorrowfully.

“As to that,” cried d’Artagnan, after a moment of reflection, “I shall
surmount it, be assured.”

“How so?”

“I will go this very evening to Treville, whom I will request to ask
this favor for me of his brother-in-law, Monsieur Dessessart.”

“But another thing.”

“What?” asked d’Artagnan, seeing that Mme. Bonacieux hesitated to
continue.

“You have, perhaps, no money?”

“PERHAPS is too much,” said d’Artagnan, smiling.

“Then,” replied Mme. Bonacieux, opening a cupboard and taking from it
the very bag which a half hour before her husband had caressed so
affectionately, “take this bag.”

“The cardinal’s?” cried d’Artagnan, breaking into a loud laugh, he
having heard, as may be remembered, thanks to the broken boards, every
syllable of the conversation between the mercer and his wife.

“The cardinal’s,” replied Mme. Bonacieux. “You see it makes a very
respectable appearance.”

“PARDIEU,” cried d’Artagnan, “it will be a double amusing affair to save
the queen with the cardinal’s money!”

“You are an amiable and charming young man,” said Mme. Bonacieux. “Be
assured you will not find her Majesty ungrateful.”

“Oh, I am already grandly recompensed!” cried d’Artagnan. “I love you;
you permit me to tell you that I do--that is already more happiness than
I dared to hope.”

“Silence!” said Mme. Bonacieux, starting.

“What!”

“Someone is talking in the street.”

“It is the voice of--”

“Of my husband! Yes, I recognize it!”

D’Artagnan ran to the door and pushed the bolt.

“He shall not come in before I am gone,” said he; “and when I am gone,
you can open to him.”

“But I ought to be gone, too. And the disappearance of his money; how am
I to justify it if I am here?”

“You are right; we must go out.”

“Go out? How? He will see us if we go out.”

“Then you must come up into my room.”

“Ah,” said Mme. Bonacieux, “you speak that in a tone that frightens me!”

Mme. Bonacieux pronounced these words with tears in her eyes. D’Artagnan
saw those tears, and much disturbed, softened, he threw himself at her
feet.

“With me you will be as safe as in a temple; I give you my word of a
gentleman.”

“Let us go,” said she, “I place full confidence in you, my friend!”

D’Artagnan drew back the bolt with precaution, and both, light as
shadows, glided through the interior door into the passage, ascended the
stairs as quietly as possible, and entered d’Artagnan’s chambers.

Once there, for greater security, the young man barricaded the door.
They both approached the window, and through a slit in the shutter they
saw Bonacieux talking with a man in a cloak.

At sight of this man, d’Artagnan started, and half drawing his sword,
sprang toward the door.

It was the man of Meung.

“What are you going to do?” cried Mme. Bonacieux; “you will ruin us
all!”

“But I have sworn to kill that man!” said d’Artagnan.

“Your life is devoted from this moment, and does not belong to you. In
the name of the queen I forbid you to throw yourself into any peril
which is foreign to that of your journey.”

“And do you command nothing in your own name?”

“In my name,” said Mme. Bonacieux, with great emotion, “in my name I beg
you! But listen; they appear to be speaking of me.”

D’Artagnan drew near the window, and lent his ear.

M Bonacieux had opened his door, and seeing the apartment, had returned
to the man in the cloak, whom he had left alone for an instant.

“She is gone,” said he; “she must have returned to the Louvre.”

“You are sure,” replied the stranger, “that she did not suspect the
intentions with which you went out?”

“No,” replied Bonacieux, with a self-sufficient air, “she is too
superficial a woman.”

“Is the young Guardsman at home?”

“I do not think he is; as you see, his shutter is closed, and you can
see no light shine through the chinks of the shutters.”

“All the same, it is well to be certain.”

“How so?”

“By knocking at his door. Go.”

“I will ask his servant.”

Bonacieux re-entered the house, passed through the same door that had
afforded a passage for the two fugitives, went up to d’Artagnan’s door,
and knocked.

No one answered. Porthos, in order to make a greater display, had that
evening borrowed Planchet. As to d’Artagnan, he took care not to give
the least sign of existence.

The moment the hand of Bonacieux sounded on the door, the two young
people felt their hearts bound within them.

“There is nobody within,” said Bonacieux.

“Never mind. Let us return to your apartment. We shall be safer there
than in the doorway.”

“Ah, my God!” whispered Mme. Bonacieux, “we shall hear no more.”

“On the contrary,” said d’Artagnan, “we shall hear better.”

D’Artagnan raised the three or four boards which made his chamber
another ear of Dionysius, spread a carpet on the floor, went upon his
knees, and made a sign to Mme. Bonacieux to stoop as he did toward the
opening.

“You are sure there is nobody there?” said the stranger.

“I will answer for it,” said Bonacieux.

“And you think that your wife--”

“Has returned to the Louvre.”

“Without speaking to anyone but yourself?”

“I am sure of it.”

“That is an important point, do you understand?”

“Then the news I brought you is of value?”

“The greatest, my dear Bonacieux; I don’t conceal this from you.”

“Then the cardinal will be pleased with me?”

“I have no doubt of it.”

“The great cardinal!”

“Are you sure, in her conversation with you, that your wife mentioned no
names?”

“I think not.”

“She did not name Madame de Chevreuse, the Duke of Buckingham, or Madame
de Vernet?”

“No; she only told me she wished to send me to London to serve the
interests of an illustrious personage.”

“The traitor!” murmured Mme. Bonacieux.

“Silence!” said d’Artagnan, taking her hand, which, without thinking of
it, she abandoned to him.

“Never mind,” continued the man in the cloak; “you were a fool not to
have pretended to accept the mission. You would then be in present
possession of the letter. The state, which is now threatened, would be
safe, and you--”

“And I?”

“Well you--the cardinal would have given you letters of nobility.”

“Did he tell you so?”

“Yes, I know that he meant to afford you that agreeable surprise.”

“Be satisfied,” replied Bonacieux; “my wife adores me, and there is yet
time.”

“The ninny!” murmured Mme. Bonacieux.

“Silence!” said d’Artagnan, pressing her hand more closely.

“How is there still time?” asked the man in the cloak.

“I go to the Louvre; I ask for Mme. Bonacieux; I say that I have
reflected; I renew the affair; I obtain the letter, and I run directly
to the cardinal.”

“Well, go quickly! I will return soon to learn the result of your trip.”

The stranger went out.

“Infamous!” said Mme. Bonacieux, addressing this epithet to her husband.

“Silence!” said d’Artagnan, pressing her hand still more warmly.

A terrible howling interrupted these reflections of d’Artagnan and Mme.
Bonacieux. It was her husband, who had discovered the disappearance of
the moneybag, and was crying “Thieves!”

“Oh, my God!” cried Mme. Bonacieux, “he will rouse the whole quarter.”

Bonacieux called a long time; but as such cries, on account of their
frequency, brought nobody in the Rue des Fossoyeurs, and as lately the
mercer’s house had a bad name, finding that nobody came, he went out
continuing to call, his voice being heard fainter and fainter as he went
in the direction of the Rue du Bac.

“Now he is gone, it is your turn to get out,” said Mme. Bonacieux.
“Courage, my friend, but above all, prudence, and think what you owe to
the queen.”

“To her and to you!” cried d’Artagnan. “Be satisfied, beautiful
Constance. I shall become worthy of her gratitude; but shall I likewise
return worthy of your love?”

The young woman only replied by the beautiful glow which mounted to her
cheeks. A few seconds afterward d’Artagnan also went out enveloped in a
large cloak, which ill-concealed the sheath of a long sword.

Mme. Bonacieux followed him with her eyes, with that long, fond look
with which he had turned the angle of the street, she fell on her knees,
and clasping her hands, “Oh, my God,” cried she, “protect the queen,
protect me!”




19 PLAN OF CAMPAIGN


D’Artagnan went straight to M. de Treville’s. He had reflected that in a
few minutes the cardinal would be warned by this cursed stranger, who
appeared to be his agent, and he judged, with reason, he had not a
moment to lose.

The heart of the young man overflowed with joy. An opportunity presented
itself to him in which there would be at the same time glory to be
acquired, and money to be gained; and as a far higher encouragement, it
brought him into close intimacy with a woman he adored. This chance did,
then, for him at once more than he would have dared to ask of
Providence.

M de Treville was in his saloon with his habitual court of gentlemen.
D’Artagnan, who was known as a familiar of the house, went straight to
his office, and sent word that he wished to see him on something of
importance.

D’Artagnan had been there scarcely five minutes when M. de Treville
entered. At the first glance, and by the joy which was painted on his
countenance, the worthy captain plainly perceived that something new was
on foot.

All the way along d’Artagnan had been consulting with himself whether he
should place confidence in M. de Treville, or whether he should only ask
him to give him CARTE BLANCHE for some secret affair. But M. de Treville
had always been so thoroughly his friend, had always been so devoted to
the king and queen, and hated the cardinal so cordially, that the young
man resolved to tell him everything.

“Did you ask for me, my good friend?” said M. de Treville.

“Yes, monsieur,” said d’Artagnan, lowering his voice, “and you will
pardon me, I hope, for having disturbed you when you know the importance
of my business.”

“Speak, then, I am all attention.”

“It concerns nothing less,” said d’Artagnan, “than the honor, perhaps
the life of the queen.”

“What did you say?” asked M. de Treville, glancing round to see if they
were surely alone, and then fixing his questioning look upon d’Artagnan.

“I say, monsieur, that chance has rendered me master of a secret--”

“Which you will guard, I hope, young man, as your life.”

“But which I must impart to you, monsieur, for you alone can assist me
in the mission I have just received from her Majesty.”

“Is this secret your own?”

“No, monsieur; it is her Majesty’s.”

“Are you authorized by her Majesty to communicate it to me?”

“No, monsieur, for, on the contrary, I am desired to preserve the
profoundest mystery.”

“Why, then, are you about to betray it to me?”

“Because, as I said, without you I can do nothing; and I am afraid you
will refuse me the favor I come to ask if you do not know to what end I
ask it.”

“Keep your secret, young man, and tell me what you wish.”

“I wish you to obtain for me, from Monsieur Dessessart, leave of absence
for fifteen days.”

“When?”

“This very night.”

“You leave Paris?”

“I am going on a mission.”

“May you tell me whither?”

“To London.”

“Has anyone an interest in preventing your arrival there?”

“The cardinal, I believe, would give the world to prevent my success.”

“And you are going alone?”

“I am going alone.”

“In that case you will not get beyond Bondy. I tell you so, by the faith
of de Treville.”

“How so?”

“You will be assassinated.”

“And I shall die in the performance of my duty.”

“But your mission will not be accomplished.”

“That is true,” replied d’Artagnan.

“Believe me,” continued Treville, “in enterprises of this kind, in order
that one may arrive, four must set out.”

“Ah, you are right, monsieur,” said d’Artagnan; “but you know Athos,
Porthos, and Aramis, and you know if I can dispose of them.”

“Without confiding to them the secret which I am not willing to know?”

“We are sworn, once for all, to implicit confidence and devotedness
against all proof. Besides, you can tell them that you have full
confidence in me, and they will not be more incredulous than you.”

“I can send to each of them leave of absence for fifteen days, that is
all--to Athos, whose wound still makes him suffer, to go to the waters
of Forges; to Porthos and Aramis to accompany their friend, whom they
are not willing to abandon in such a painful condition. Sending their
leave of absence will be proof enough that I authorize their journey.”

“Thanks, monsieur. You are a hundred times too good.”

“Begone, then, find them instantly, and let all be done tonight! Ha! But
first write your request to Dessessart. Perhaps you had a spy at your
heels; and your visit, if it should ever be known to the cardinal, will
thus seem legitimate.”

D’Artagnan drew up his request, and M. de Treville, on receiving it,
assured him that by two o’clock in the morning the four leaves of
absence should be at the respective domiciles of the travelers.

“Have the goodness to send mine to Athos’s residence. I should dread
some disagreeable encounter if I were to go home.”

“Be easy. Adieu, and a prosperous voyage. A PROPOS,” said M. de
Treville, calling him back.

D’Artagnan returned.

“Have you any money?”

D’Artagnan tapped the bag he had in his pocket.

“Enough?” asked M. de Treville.

“Three hundred pistoles.”

“Oh, plenty! That would carry you to the end of the world. Begone,
then!”

D’Artagnan saluted M. de Treville, who held out his hand to him;
d’Artagnan pressed it with a respect mixed with gratitude. Since his
first arrival at Paris, he had had constant occasion to honor this
excellent man, whom he had always found worthy, loyal, and great.

His first visit was to Aramis, at whose residence he had not been since
the famous evening on which he had followed Mme. Bonacieux. Still
further, he had seldom seen the young Musketeer; but every time he had
seen him, he had remarked a deep sadness imprinted on his countenance.

This evening, especially, Aramis was melancholy and thoughtful.
D’Artagnan asked some questions about this prolonged melancholy. Aramis
pleaded as his excuse a commentary upon the eighteenth chapter of St.
Augustine, which he was forced to write in Latin for the following week,
and which preoccupied him a good deal.

After the two friends had been chatting a few moments, a servant from M.
de Treville entered, bringing a sealed packet.

“What is that?” asked Aramis.

“The leave of absence Monsieur has asked for,” replied the lackey.

“For me! I have asked for no leave of absence.”

“Hold your tongue and take it!” said d’Artagnan. “And you, my friend,
there is a demipistole for your trouble; you will tell Monsieur de
Treville that Monsieur Aramis is very much obliged to him. Go.”

The lackey bowed to the ground and departed.

“What does all this mean?” asked Aramis.

“Pack up all you want for a journey of a fortnight, and follow me.”

“But I cannot leave Paris just now without knowing--”

Aramis stopped.

“What is become of her? I suppose you mean--” continued d’Artagnan.

“Become of whom?” replied Aramis.

“The woman who was here--the woman with the embroidered handkerchief.”

“Who told you there was a woman here?” replied Aramis, becoming as pale
as death.

“I saw her.”

“And you know who she is?”

“I believe I can guess, at least.”

“Listen!” said Aramis. “Since you appear to know so many things, can you
tell me what is become of that woman?”

“I presume that she has returned to Tours.”

“To Tours? Yes, that may be. You evidently know her. But why did she
return to Tours without telling me anything?”

“Because she was in fear of being arrested.”

“Why has she not written to me, then?”

“Because she was afraid of compromising you.”

“d’Artagnan, you restore me to life!” cried Aramis. “I fancied myself
despised, betrayed. I was so delighted to see her again! I could not
have believed she would risk her liberty for me, and yet for what other
cause could she have returned to Paris?”

“For the cause which today takes us to England.”

“And what is this cause?” demanded Aramis.

“Oh, you’ll know it someday, Aramis; but at present I must imitate the
discretion of ‘the doctor’s niece.’”

Aramis smiled, as he remembered the tale he had told his friends on a
certain evening. “Well, then, since she has left Paris, and you are sure
of it, d’Artagnan, nothing prevents me, and I am ready to follow you.
You say we are going--”

“To see Athos now, and if you will come thither, I beg you to make
haste, for we have lost much time already. A PROPOS, inform Bazin.”

“Will Bazin go with us?” asked Aramis.

“Perhaps so. At all events, it is best that he should follow us to
Athos’s.”

Aramis called Bazin, and, after having ordered him to join them at
Athos’s residence, said “Let us go then,” at the same time taking his
cloak, sword, and three pistols, opening uselessly two or three drawers
to see if he could not find stray coin. When well assured this search
was superfluous, he followed d’Artagnan, wondering to himself how this
young Guardsman should know so well who the lady was to whom he had
given hospitality, and that he should know better than himself what had
become of her.

Only as they went out Aramis placed his hand upon the arm of d’Artagnan,
and looking at him earnestly, “You have not spoken of this lady?” said
he.

“To nobody in the world.”

“Not even to Athos or Porthos?”

“I have not breathed a syllable to them.”

“Good enough!”

Tranquil on this important point, Aramis continued his way with
d’Artagnan, and both soon arrived at Athos’s dwelling. They found him
holding his leave of absence in one hand, and M. de Treville’s note in
the other.

“Can you explain to me what signify this leave of absence and this
letter, which I have just received?” said the astonished Athos.

My dear Athos,

I wish, as your health absolutely requires it, that you should rest for
a fortnight. Go, then, and take the waters of Forges, or any that may be
more agreeable to you, and recuperate yourself as quickly as possible.

Yours affectionate,

de Treville

“Well, this leave of absence and that letter mean that you must follow
me, Athos.”

“To the waters of Forges?”

“There or elsewhere.”

“In the king’s service?”

“Either the king’s or the queen’s. Are we not their Majesties’
servants?”

At that moment Porthos entered. “PARDIEU!” said he, “here is a strange
thing! Since when, I wonder, in the Musketeers, did they grant men leave
of absence without their asking for it?”

“Since,” said d’Artagnan, “they have friends who ask it for them.”

“Ah, ah!” said Porthos, “it appears there’s something fresh here.”

“Yes, we are going--” said Aramis.

“To what country?” demanded Porthos.

“My faith! I don’t know much about it,” said Athos. “Ask d’Artagnan.”

“To London, gentlemen,” said d’Artagnan.

“To London!” cried Porthos; “and what the devil are we going to do in
London?”

“That is what I am not at liberty to tell you, gentlemen; you must trust
to me.”

“But in order to go to London,” added Porthos, “money is needed, and I
have none.”

“Nor I,” said Aramis.

“Nor I,” said Athos.

“I have,” replied d’Artagnan, pulling out his treasure from his pocket,
and placing it on the table. “There are in this bag three hundred
pistoles. Let each take seventy-five; that is enough to take us to
London and back. Besides, make yourselves easy; we shall not all arrive
at London.”

“Why so?”

“Because, in all probability, some one of us will be left on the road.”

“Is this, then, a campaign upon which we are now entering?”

“One of a most dangerous kind, I give you notice.”

“Ah! But if we do risk being killed,” said Porthos, “at least I should
like to know what for.”

“You would be all the wiser,” said Athos.

“And yet,” said Aramis, “I am somewhat of Porthos’s opinion.”

“Is the king accustomed to give you such reasons? No. He says to you
jauntily, ‘Gentlemen, there is fighting going on in Gascony or in
Flanders; go and fight,’ and you go there. Why? You need give yourselves
no more uneasiness about this.”

“d’Artagnan is right,” said Athos; “here are our three leaves of absence
which came from Monsieur de Treville, and here are three hundred
pistoles which came from I don’t know where. So let us go and get killed
where we are told to go. Is life worth the trouble of so many questions?
D’Artagnan, I am ready to follow you.”

“And I also,” said Porthos.

“And I also,” said Aramis. “And, indeed, I am not sorry to quit Paris; I
had need of distraction.”

“Well, you will have distractions enough, gentlemen, be assured,” said
d’Artagnan.

“And, now, when are we to go?” asked Athos.

“Immediately,” replied d’Artagnan; “we have not a minute to lose.”

“Hello, Grimaud! Planchet! Mousqueton! Bazin!” cried the four young men,
calling their lackeys, “clean my boots, and fetch the horses from the
hotel.”

Each Musketeer was accustomed to leave at the general hotel, as at a
barrack, his own horse and that of his lackey. Planchet, Grimaud,
Mousqueton, and Bazin set off at full speed.

“Now let us lay down the plan of campaign,” said Porthos. “Where do we
go first?”

“To Calais,” said d’Artagnan; “that is the most direct line to London.”

“Well,” said Porthos, “this is my advice--”

“Speak!”

“Four men traveling together would be suspected. D’Artagnan will give
each of us his instructions. I will go by the way of Boulogne to clear
the way; Athos will set out two hours after, by that of Amiens; Aramis
will follow us by that of Noyon; as to d’Artagnan, he will go by what
route he thinks is best, in Planchet’s clothes, while Planchet will
follow us like d’Artagnan, in the uniform of the Guards.”

“Gentlemen,” said Athos, “my opinion is that it is not proper to allow
lackeys to have anything to do in such an affair. A secret may, by
chance, be betrayed by gentlemen; but it is almost always sold by
lackeys.”

“Porthos’s plan appears to me to be impracticable,” said d’Artagnan,
“inasmuch as I am myself ignorant of what instructions I can give you. I
am the bearer of a letter, that is all. I have not, and I cannot make
three copies of that letter, because it is sealed. We must, then, as it
appears to me, travel in company. This letter is here, in this pocket,”
and he pointed to the pocket which contained the letter. “If I should be
killed, one of you must take it, and continue the route; if he be
killed, it will be another’s turn, and so on--provided a single one
arrives, that is all that is required.”

“Bravo, d’Artagnan, your opinion is mine,” cried Athos, “Besides, we
must be consistent; I am going to take the waters, you will accompany
me. Instead of taking the waters of Forges, I go and take sea waters; I
am free to do so. If anyone wishes to stop us, I will show Monsieur de
Treville’s letter, and you will show your leaves of absence. If we are
attacked, we will defend ourselves; if we are tried, we will stoutly
maintain that we were only anxious to dip ourselves a certain number of
times in the sea. They would have an easy bargain of four isolated men;
whereas four men together make a troop. We will arm our four lackeys
with pistols and musketoons; if they send an army out against us, we
will give battle, and the survivor, as d’Artagnan says, will carry the
letter.”

“Well said,” cried Aramis; “you don’t often speak, Athos, but when you
do speak, it is like St. John of the Golden Mouth. I agree to Athos’s
plan. And you, Porthos?”

“I agree to it, too,” said Porthos, “if d’Artagnan approves of it.
D’Artagnan, being the bearer of the letter, is naturally the head of the
enterprise; let him decide, and we will execute.”

“Well,” said d’Artagnan, “I decide that we should adopt Athos’s plan,
and that we set off in half an hour.”

“Agreed!” shouted the three Musketeers in chorus.

Each one, stretching out his hand to the bag, took his seventy-five
pistoles, and made his preparations to set out at the time appointed.




20 THE JOURNEY


At two o’clock in the morning, our four adventurers left Paris by the
Barriere St. Denis. As long as it was dark they remained silent; in
spite of themselves they submitted to the influence of the obscurity,
and apprehended ambushes on every side.

With the first rays of day their tongues were loosened; with the sun
gaiety revived. It was like the eve of a battle; the heart beat, the
eyes laughed, and they felt that the life they were perhaps going to
lose, was, after all, a good thing.

Besides, the appearance of the caravan was formidable. The black horses
of the Musketeers, their martial carriage, with the regimental step of
these noble companions of the soldier, would have betrayed the most
strict incognito. The lackeys followed, armed to the teeth.

All went well till they arrived at Chantilly, which they reached about
eight o’clock in the morning. They needed breakfast, and alighted at the
door of an AUBERGE, recommended by a sign representing St. Martin giving
half his cloak to a poor man. They ordered the lackeys not to unsaddle
the horses, and to hold themselves in readiness to set off again
immediately.

They entered the common hall, and placed themselves at table. A
gentleman, who had just arrived by the route of Dammartin, was seated at
the same table, and was breakfasting. He opened the conversation about
rain and fine weather; the travelers replied. He drank to their good
health, and the travelers returned his politeness.

But at the moment Mousqueton came to announce that the horses were
ready, and they were arising from table, the stranger proposed to
Porthos to drink the health of the cardinal. Porthos replied that he
asked no better if the stranger, in his turn, would drink the health of
the king. The stranger cried that he acknowledged no other king but his
Eminence. Porthos called him drunk, and the stranger drew his sword.

“You have committed a piece of folly,” said Athos, “but it can’t be
helped; there is no drawing back. Kill the fellow, and rejoin us as soon
as you can.”

All three remounted their horses, and set out at a good pace, while
Porthos was promising his adversary to perforate him with all the
thrusts known in the fencing schools.

“There goes one!” cried Athos, at the end of five hundred paces.

“But why did that man attack Porthos rather than any other one of us?”
asked Aramis.

“Because, as Porthos was talking louder than the rest of us, he took him
for the chief,” said d’Artagnan.

“I always said that this cadet from Gascony was a well of wisdom,”
murmured Athos; and the travelers continued their route.

At Beauvais they stopped two hours, as well to breathe their horses a
little as to wait for Porthos. At the end of two hours, as Porthos did
not come, not any news of him, they resumed their journey.

At a league from Beauvais, where the road was confined between two high
banks, they fell in with eight or ten men who, taking advantage of the
road being unpaved in this spot, appeared to be employed in digging
holes and filling up the ruts with mud.

Aramis, not liking to soil his boots with this artificial mortar,
apostrophized them rather sharply. Athos wished to restrain him, but it
was too late. The laborers began to jeer the travelers and by their
insolence disturbed the equanimity even of the cool Athos, who urged on
his horse against one of them.

Then each of these men retreated as far as the ditch, from which each
took a concealed musket; the result was that our seven travelers were
outnumbered in weapons. Aramis received a ball which passed through his
shoulder, and Mousqueton another ball which lodged in the fleshy part
which prolongs the lower portion of the loins. Therefore Mousqueton
alone fell from his horse, not because he was severely wounded, but not
being able to see the wound, he judged it to be more serious than it
really was.

“It was an ambuscade!” shouted d’Artagnan. “Don’t waste a charge!
Forward!”

Aramis, wounded as he was, seized the mane of his horse, which carried
him on with the others. Mousqueton’s horse rejoined them, and galloped
by the side of his companions.

“That will serve us for a relay,” said Athos.

“I would rather have had a hat,” said d’Artagnan. “Mine was carried away
by a ball. By my faith, it is very fortunate that the letter was not in
it.”

“They’ll kill poor Porthos when he comes up,” said Aramis.

“If Porthos were on his legs, he would have rejoined us by this time,”
said Athos. “My opinion is that on the ground the drunken man was not
intoxicated.”

They continued at their best speed for two hours, although the horses
were so fatigued that it was to be feared they would soon refuse
service.

The travelers had chosen crossroads in the hope that they might meet
with less interruption; but at Crevecoeur, Aramis declared he could
proceed no farther. In fact, it required all the courage which he
concealed beneath his elegant form and polished manners to bear him so
far. He grew more pale every minute, and they were obliged to support
him on his horse. They lifted him off at the door of a cabaret, left
Bazin with him, who, besides, in a skirmish was more embarrassing than
useful, and set forward again in the hope of sleeping at Amiens.

“MORBLEU,” said Athos, as soon as they were again in motion, “reduced to
two masters and Grimaud and Planchet! MORBLEU! I won’t be their dupe, I
will answer for it. I will neither open my mouth nor draw my sword
between this and Calais. I swear by--”

“Don’t waste time in swearing,” said d’Artagnan; “let us gallop, if our
horses will consent.”

And the travelers buried their rowels in their horses’ flanks, who thus
vigorously stimulated recovered their energies. They arrived at Amiens
at midnight, and alighted at the AUBERGE of the Golden Lily.

The host had the appearance of as honest a man as any on earth. He
received the travelers with his candlestick in one hand and his cotton
nightcap in the other. He wished to lodge the two travelers each in a
charming chamber; but unfortunately these charming chambers were at the
opposite extremities of the hotel. D’Artagnan and Athos refused them.
The host replied that he had no other worthy of their Excellencies; but
the travelers declared they would sleep in the common chamber, each on a
mattress which might be thrown upon the ground. The host insisted; but
the travelers were firm, and he was obliged to do as they wished.

They had just prepared their beds and barricaded their door within, when
someone knocked at the yard shutter; they demanded who was there, and
recognizing the voices of their lackeys, opened the shutter. It was
indeed Planchet and Grimaud.

“Grimaud can take care of the horses,” said Planchet. “If you are
willing, gentlemen, I will sleep across your doorway, and you will then
be certain that nobody can reach you.”

“And on what will you sleep?” said d’Artagnan.

“Here is my bed,” replied Planchet, producing a bundle of straw.

“Come, then,” said d’Artagnan, “you are right. Mine host’s face does not
please me at all; it is too gracious.”

“Nor me either,” said Athos.

Planchet mounted by the window and installed himself across the doorway,
while Grimaud went and shut himself up in the stable, undertaking that
by five o’clock in the morning he and the four horses should be ready.

The night was quiet enough. Toward two o’clock in the morning somebody
endeavored to open the door; but as Planchet awoke in an instant and
cried, “Who goes there?” somebody replied that he was mistaken, and went
away.

At four o’clock in the morning they heard a terrible riot in the
stables. Grimaud had tried to waken the stable boys, and the stable boys
had beaten him. When they opened the window, they saw the poor lad lying
senseless, with his head split by a blow with a pitchfork.

Planchet went down into the yard, and wished to saddle the horses; but
the horses were all used up. Mousqueton’s horse which had traveled for
five or six hours without a rider the day before, might have been able
to pursue the journey; but by an inconceivable error the veterinary
surgeon, who had been sent for, as it appeared, to bleed one of the
host’s horses, had bled Mousqueton’s.

This began to be annoying. All these successive accidents were perhaps
the result of chance; but they might be the fruits of a plot. Athos and
d’Artagnan went out, while Planchet was sent to inquire if there were
not three horses for sale in the neighborhood. At the door stood two
horses, fresh, strong, and fully equipped. These would just have suited
them. He asked where their masters were, and was informed that they had
passed the night in the inn, and were then settling their bill with the
host.

Athos went down to pay the reckoning, while d’Artagnan and Planchet
stood at the street door. The host was in a lower and back room, to
which Athos was requested to go.

Athos entered without the least mistrust, and took out two pistoles to
pay the bill. The host was alone, seated before his desk, one of the
drawers of which was partly open. He took the money which Athos offered
to him, and after turning and turning it over and over in his hands,
suddenly cried out that it was bad, and that he would have him and his
companions arrested as forgers.

“You blackguard!” cried Athos, going toward him, “I’ll cut your ears
off!”

At the same instant, four men, armed to the teeth, entered by side
doors, and rushed upon Athos.

“I am taken!” shouted Athos, with all the power of his lungs. “Go on,
d’Artagnan! Spur, spur!” and he fired two pistols.

D’Artagnan and Planchet did not require twice bidding; they unfastened
the two horses that were waiting at the door, leaped upon them, buried
their spurs in their sides, and set off at full gallop.

“Do you know what has become of Athos?” asked d’Artagnan of Planchet, as
they galloped on.

“Ah, monsieur,” said Planchet, “I saw one fall at each of his two shots,
and he appeared to me, through the glass door, to be fighting with his
sword with the others.”

“Brave Athos!” murmured d’Artagnan, “and to think that we are compelled
to leave him; maybe the same fate awaits us two paces hence. Forward,
Planchet, forward! You are a brave fellow.”

“As I told you, monsieur,” replied Planchet, “Picards are found out by
being used. Besides, I am here in my own country, and that excites me.”

And both, with free use of the spur, arrived at St. Omer without drawing
bit. At St. Omer they breathed their horses with the bridles passed
under their arms for fear of accident, and ate a morsel from their hands
on the stones of the street, after they departed again.

At a hundred paces from the gates of Calais, d’Artagnan’s horse gave
out, and could not by any means be made to get up again, the blood
flowing from his eyes and his nose. There still remained Planchet’s
horse; but he stopped short, and could not be made to move a step.

Fortunately, as we have said, they were within a hundred paces of the
city; they left their two nags upon the high road, and ran toward the
quay. Planchet called his master’s attention to a gentleman who had just
arrived with his lackey, and only preceded them by about fifty paces.
They made all speed to come up to this gentleman, who appeared to be in
great haste. His boots were covered with dust, and he inquired if he
could not instantly cross over to England.

“Nothing would be more easy,” said the captain of a vessel ready to set
sail, “but this morning came an order to let no one leave without
express permission from the cardinal.”

“I have that permission,” said the gentleman, drawing the paper from his
pocket; “here it is.”

“Have it examined by the governor of the port,” said the shipmaster,
“and give me the preference.”

“Where shall I find the governor?”

“At his country house.”

“And that is situated?”

“At a quarter of a league from the city. Look, you may see it from
here--at the foot of that little hill, that slated roof.”

“Very well,” said the gentleman. And, with his lackey, he took the road
to the governor’s country house.

D’Artagnan and Planchet followed the gentleman at a distance of five
hundred paces. Once outside the city, d’Artagnan overtook the gentleman
as he was entering a little wood.

“Monsieur, you appear to be in great haste?”

“No one can be more so, monsieur.”

“I am sorry for that,” said d’Artagnan; “for as I am in great haste
likewise, I wish to beg you to render me a service.”

“What?”

“To let me sail first.”

“That’s impossible,” said the gentleman; “I have traveled sixty leagues
in forty hours, and by tomorrow at midday I must be in London.”

“I have performed that same distance in forty hours, and by ten o’clock
in the morning I must be in London.”

“Very sorry, monsieur; but I was here first, and will not sail second.”

“I am sorry, too, monsieur; but I arrived second, and must sail first.”

“The king’s service!” said the gentleman.

“My own service!” said d’Artagnan.

“But this is a needless quarrel you seek with me, as it seems to me.”

“PARBLEU! What do you desire it to be?”

“What do you want?”

“Would you like to know?”

“Certainly.”

“Well, then, I wish that order of which you are bearer, seeing that I
have not one of my own and must have one.”

“You jest, I presume.”

“I never jest.”

“Let me pass!”

“You shall not pass.”

“My brave young man, I will blow out your brains. HOLA, Lubin, my
pistols!”

“Planchet,” called out d’Artagnan, “take care of the lackey; I will
manage the master.”

Planchet, emboldened by the first exploit, sprang upon Lubin; and being
strong and vigorous, he soon got him on the broad of his back, and
placed his knee upon his breast.

“Go on with your affair, monsieur,” cried Planchet; “I have finished
mine.”

Seeing this, the gentleman drew his sword, and sprang upon d’Artagnan;
but he had too strong an adversary. In three seconds d’Artagnan had
wounded him three times, exclaiming at each thrust, “One for Athos, one
for Porthos; and one for Aramis!”

At the third hit the gentleman fell like a log. D’Artagnan believed him
to be dead, or at least insensible, and went toward him for the purpose
of taking the order; but the moment he extended his hand to search for
it, the wounded man, who had not dropped his sword, plunged the point
into d’Artagnan’s breast, crying, “One for you!”

“And one for me--the best for last!” cried d’Artagnan, furious, nailing
him to the earth with a fourth thrust through his body.

This time the gentleman closed his eyes and fainted. D’Artagnan searched
his pockets, and took from one of them the order for the passage. It was
in the name of Comte de Wardes.

Then, casting a glance on the handsome young man, who was scarcely
twenty-five years of age, and whom he was leaving in his gore, deprived
of sense and perhaps dead, he gave a sigh for that unaccountable destiny
which leads men to destroy each other for the interests of people who
are strangers to them and who often do not even know that they exist.
But he was soon aroused from these reflections by Lubin, who uttered
loud cries and screamed for help with all his might.

Planchet grasped him by the throat, and pressed as hard as he could.
“Monsieur,” said he, “as long as I hold him in this manner, he can’t
cry, I’ll be bound; but as soon as I let go he will howl again. I know
him for a Norman, and Normans are obstinate.”

In fact, tightly held as he was, Lubin endeavored still to cry out.

“Stay!” said d’Artagnan; and taking out his handkerchief, he gagged him.

“Now,” said Planchet, “let us bind him to a tree.”

This being properly done, they drew the Comte de Wardes close to his
servant; and as night was approaching, and as the wounded man and the
bound man were at some little distance within the wood, it was evident
they were likely to remain there till the next day.

“And now,” said d’Artagnan, “to the Governor’s.”

“But you are wounded, it seems,” said Planchet.

“Oh, that’s nothing! Let us attend to what is more pressing first, and
then we will attend to my wound; besides, it does not seem very
dangerous.”

And they both set forward as fast as they could toward the country house
of the worthy functionary.

The Comte de Wardes was announced, and d’Artagnan was introduced.

“You have an order signed by the cardinal?” said the governor.

“Yes, monsieur,” replied d’Artagnan; “here it is.”

“Ah, ah! It is quite regular and explicit,” said the governor.

“Most likely,” said d’Artagnan; “I am one of his most faithful
servants.”

“It appears that his Eminence is anxious to prevent someone from
crossing to England?”

“Yes; a certain d’Artagnan, a Bearnese gentleman who left Paris in
company with three of his friends, with the intention of going to
London.”

“Do you know him personally?” asked the governor.

“Whom?”

“This d’Artagnan.”

“Perfectly well.”

“Describe him to me, then.”

“Nothing more easy.”

And d’Artagnan gave, feature for feature, a description of the Comte de
Wardes.

“Is he accompanied?”

“Yes; by a lackey named Lubin.”

“We will keep a sharp lookout for them; and if we lay hands on them his
Eminence may be assured they will be reconducted to Paris under a good
escort.”

“And by doing so, Monsieur the Governor,” said d’Artagnan, “you will
deserve well of the cardinal.”

“Shall you see him on your return, Monsieur Count?”

“Without a doubt.”

“Tell him, I beg you, that I am his humble servant.”

“I will not fail.”

Delighted with this assurance the governor countersigned the passport
and delivered it to d’Artagnan. D’Artagnan lost no time in useless
compliments. He thanked the governor, bowed, and departed. Once outside,
he and Planchet set off as fast as they could; and by making a long
detour avoided the wood and reentered the city by another gate.

The vessel was quite ready to sail, and the captain was waiting on the
wharf. “Well?” said he, on perceiving d’Artagnan.

“Here is my pass countersigned,” said the latter.

“And that other gentleman?

“He will not go today,” said d’Artagnan; “but here, I’ll pay you for us
two.”

“In that case let us go,” said the shipmaster.

“Let us go,” repeated d’Artagnan.

He leaped with Planchet into the boat, and five minutes after they were
on board. It was time; for they had scarcely sailed half a league, when
d’Artagnan saw a flash and heard a detonation. It was the cannon which
announced the closing of the port.

He had now leisure to look to his wound. Fortunately, as d’Artagnan had
thought, it was not dangerous. The point of the sword had touched a rib,
and glanced along the bone. Still further, his shirt had stuck to the
wound, and he had lost only a few drops of blood.

D’Artagnan was worn out with fatigue. A mattress was laid upon the deck
for him. He threw himself upon it, and fell asleep.

On the morrow, at break of day, they were still three or four leagues
from the coast of England. The breeze had been so light all night, they
had made but little progress. At ten o’clock the vessel cast anchor in
the harbor of Dover, and at half past ten d’Artagnan placed his foot on
English land, crying, “Here I am at last!”

But that was not all; they must get to London. In England the post was
well served. D’Artagnan and Planchet took each a post horse, and a
postillion rode before them. In a few hours they were in the capital.

D’Artagnan did not know London; he did not know a word of English; but
he wrote the name of Buckingham on a piece of paper, and everyone
pointed out to him the way to the duke’s hotel.

The duke was at Windsor hunting with the king. D’Artagnan inquired for
the confidential valet of the duke, who, having accompanied him in all
his voyages, spoke French perfectly well; he told him that he came from
Paris on an affair of life and death, and that he must speak with his
master instantly.

The confidence with which d’Artagnan spoke convinced Patrick, which was
the name of this minister of the minister. He ordered two horses to be
saddled, and himself went as guide to the young Guardsman. As for
Planchet, he had been lifted from his horse as stiff as a rush; the poor
lad’s strength was almost exhausted. D’Artagnan seemed iron.

On their arrival at the castle they learned that Buckingham and the king
were hawking in the marshes two or three leagues away. In twenty minutes
they were on the spot named. Patrick soon caught the sound of his
master’s voice calling his falcon.

“Whom must I announce to my Lord Duke?” asked Patrick.

“The young man who one evening sought a quarrel with him on the Pont
Neuf, opposite the Samaritaine.”

“A singular introduction!”

“You will find that it is as good as another.”

Patrick galloped off, reached the duke, and announced to him in the
terms directed that a messenger awaited him.

Buckingham at once remembered the circumstance, and suspecting that
something was going on in France of which it was necessary he should be
informed, he only took the time to inquire where the messenger was, and
recognizing from afar the uniform of the Guards, he put his horse into a
gallop, and rode straight up to d’Artagnan. Patrick discreetly kept in
the background.

“No misfortune has happened to the queen?” cried Buckingham, the instant
he came up, throwing all his fear and love into the question.

“I believe not; nevertheless I believe she runs some great peril from
which your Grace alone can extricate her.”

“I!” cried Buckingham. “What is it? I should be too happy to be of any
service to her. Speak, speak!”

“Take this letter,” said d’Artagnan.

“This letter! From whom comes this letter?”

“From her Majesty, as I think.”

“From her Majesty!” said Buckingham, becoming so pale that d’Artagnan
feared he would faint as he broke the seal.

“What is this rent?” said he, showing d’Artagnan a place where it had
been pierced through.

“Ah,” said d’Artagnan, “I did not see that; it was the sword of the
Comte de Wardes which made that hole, when he gave me a good thrust in
the breast.”

“You are wounded?” asked Buckingham, as he opened the letter.

“Oh, nothing but a scratch,” said d’Artagnan.

“Just heaven, what have I read?” cried the duke. “Patrick, remain here,
or rather join the king, wherever he may be, and tell his Majesty that I
humbly beg him to excuse me, but an affair of the greatest importance
recalls me to London. Come, monsieur, come!” and both set off towards
the capital at full gallop.




21 THE COUNTESS DE WINTER


As they rode along, the duke endeavored to draw from d’Artagnan, not all
that had happened, but what d’Artagnan himself knew. By adding all that
he heard from the mouth of the young man to his own remembrances, he was
enabled to form a pretty exact idea of a position of the seriousness of
which, for the rest, the queen’s letter, short but explicit, gave him
the clue. But that which astonished him most was that the cardinal, so
deeply interested in preventing this young man from setting his foot in
England, had not succeeded in arresting him on the road. It was then,
upon the manifestation of this astonishment, that d’Artagnan related to
him the precaution taken, and how, thanks to the devotion of his three
friends, whom he had left scattered and bleeding on the road, he had
succeeded in coming off with a single sword thrust, which had pierced
the queen’s letter and for which he had repaid M. de Wardes with such
terrible coin. While he was listening to this recital, delivered with
the greatest simplicity, the duke looked from time to time at the young
man with astonishment, as if he could not comprehend how so much
prudence, courage, and devotedness could be allied with a countenance
which indicated not more than twenty years.

The horses went like the wind, and in a few minutes they were at the
gates of London. D’Artagnan imagined that on arriving in town the duke
would slacken his pace, but it was not so. He kept on his way at the
same rate, heedless about upsetting those whom he met on the road. In
fact, in crossing the city two or three accidents of this kind happened;
but Buckingham did not even turn his head to see what became of those he
had knocked down. D’Artagnan followed him amid cries which strongly
resembled curses.

On entering the court of his hotel, Buckingham sprang from his horse,
and without thinking what became of the animal, threw the bridle on his
neck, and sprang toward the vestibule. D’Artagnan did the same, with a
little more concern, however, for the noble creatures, whose merits he
fully appreciated; but he had the satisfaction of seeing three or four
grooms run from the kitchens and the stables, and busy themselves with
the steeds.

The duke walked so fast that d’Artagnan had some trouble in keeping up
with him. He passed through several apartments, of an elegance of which
even the greatest nobles of France had not even an idea, and arrived at
length in a bedchamber which was at once a miracle of taste and of
richness. In the alcove of this chamber was a door concealed in the
tapestry which the duke opened with a little gold key which he wore
suspended from his neck by a chain of the same metal. With discretion
d’Artagnan remained behind; but at the moment when Buckingham crossed
the threshold, he turned round, and seeing the hesitation of the young
man, “Come in!” cried he, “and if you have the good fortune to be
admitted to her Majesty’s presence, tell her what you have seen.”

Encouraged by this invitation, d’Artagnan followed the duke, who closed
the door after them. The two found themselves in a small chapel covered
with a tapestry of Persian silk worked with gold, and brilliantly
lighted with a vast number of candles. Over a species of altar, and
beneath a canopy of blue velvet, surmounted by white and red plumes, was
a full-length portrait of Anne of Austria, so perfect in its resemblance
that d’Artagnan uttered a cry of surprise on beholding it. One might
believe the queen was about to speak. On the altar, and beneath the
portrait, was the casket containing the diamond studs.

The duke approached the altar, knelt as a priest might have done before
a crucifix, and opened the casket. “There,” said he, drawing from the
casket a large bow of blue ribbon all sparkling with diamonds, “there
are the precious studs which I have taken an oath should be buried with
me. The queen gave them to me, the queen requires them again. Her will
be done, like that of God, in all things.”

Then, he began to kiss, one after the other, those dear studs with which
he was about to part. All at once he uttered a terrible cry.

“What is the matter?” exclaimed d’Artagnan, anxiously; “what has
happened to you, my Lord?”

“All is lost!” cried Buckingham, becoming as pale as a corpse; “two of
the studs are wanting, there are only ten.”

“Can you have lost them, my Lord, or do you think they have been
stolen?”

“They have been stolen,” replied the duke, “and it is the cardinal who
has dealt this blow. Hold; see! The ribbons which held them have been
cut with scissors.”

“If my Lord suspects they have been stolen, perhaps the person who stole
them still has them in his hands.”

“Wait, wait!” said the duke. “The only time I have worn these studs was
at a ball given by the king eight days ago at Windsor. The Comtesse de
Winter, with whom I had quarreled, became reconciled to me at that ball.
That reconciliation was nothing but the vengeance of a jealous woman. I
have never seen her from that day. The woman is an agent of the
cardinal.”

“He has agents, then, throughout the world?” cried d’Artagnan.

“Oh, yes,” said Buckingham, grating his teeth with rage. “Yes, he is a
terrible antagonist. But when is this ball to take place?”

“Monday next.”

“Monday next! Still five days before us. That’s more time than we want.
Patrick!” cried the duke, opening the door of the chapel, “Patrick!” His
confidential valet appeared.

“My jeweler and my secretary.”

The valet went out with a mute promptitude which showed him accustomed
to obey blindly and without reply.

But although the jeweler had been mentioned first, it was the secretary
who first made his appearance. This was simply because he lived in the
hotel. He found Buckingham seated at a table in his bedchamber, writing
orders with his own hand.

“Mr. Jackson,” said he, “go instantly to the Lord Chancellor, and tell
him that I charge him with the execution of these orders. I wish them to
be promulgated immediately.”

“But, my Lord, if the Lord Chancellor interrogates me upon the motives
which may have led your Grace to adopt such an extraordinary measure,
what shall I reply?”

“That such is my pleasure, and that I answer for my will to no man.”

“Will that be the answer,” replied the secretary, smiling, “which he
must transmit to his Majesty if, by chance, his Majesty should have the
curiosity to know why no vessel is to leave any of the ports of Great
Britain?”

“You are right, Mr. Jackson,” replied Buckingham. “He will say, in that
case, to the king that I am determined on war, and that this measure is
my first act of hostility against France.”

The secretary bowed and retired.

“We are safe on that side,” said Buckingham, turning toward d’Artagnan.
“If the studs are not yet gone to Paris, they will not arrive till after
you.”

“How so?”

“I have just placed an embargo on all vessels at present in his
Majesty’s ports, and without particular permission, not one dare lift an
anchor.”

D’Artagnan looked with stupefaction at a man who thus employed the
unlimited power with which he was clothed by the confidence of a king in
the prosecution of his intrigues. Buckingham saw by the expression of
the young man’s face what was passing in his mind, and he smiled.

“Yes,” said he, “yes, Anne of Austria is my true queen. Upon a word from
her, I would betray my country, I would betray my king, I would betray
my God. She asked me not to send the Protestants of La Rochelle the
assistance I promised them; I have not done so. I broke my word, it is
true; but what signifies that? I obeyed my love; and have I not been
richly paid for that obedience? It was to that obedience I owe her
portrait.”

D’Artagnan was amazed to note by what fragile and unknown threads the
destinies of nations and the lives of men are suspended. He was lost in
these reflections when the goldsmith entered. He was an Irishman--one of
the most skillful of his craft, and who himself confessed that he gained
a hundred thousand livres a year by the Duke of Buckingham.

“Mr. O’Reilly,” said the duke, leading him into the chapel, “look at
these diamond studs, and tell me what they are worth apiece.”

The goldsmith cast a glance at the elegant manner in which they were
set, calculated, one with another, what the diamonds were worth, and
without hesitation said, “Fifteen hundred pistoles each, my Lord.”

“How many days would it require to make two studs exactly like them? You
see there are two wanting.”

“Eight days, my Lord.”

“I will give you three thousand pistoles apiece if I can have them by
the day after tomorrow.”

“My Lord, they shall be yours.”

“You are a jewel of a man, Mr. O’Reilly; but that is not all. These
studs cannot be trusted to anybody; it must be done in the palace.”

“Impossible, my Lord! There is no one but myself can so execute them
that one cannot tell the new from the old.”

“Therefore, my dear Mr. O’Reilly, you are my prisoner. And if you wish
ever to leave my palace, you cannot; so make the best of it. Name to me
such of your workmen as you need, and point out the tools they must
bring.”

The goldsmith knew the duke. He knew all objection would be useless, and
instantly determined how to act.

“May I be permitted to inform my wife?” said he.

“Oh, you may even see her if you like, my dear Mr. O’Reilly. Your
captivity shall be mild, be assured; and as every inconvenience deserves
its indemnification, here is, in addition to the price of the studs, an
order for a thousand pistoles, to make you forget the annoyance I cause
you.”

D’Artagnan could not get over the surprise created in him by this
minister, who thus open-handed, sported with men and millions.

As to the goldsmith, he wrote to his wife, sending her the order for the
thousand pistoles, and charging her to send him, in exchange, his most
skillful apprentice, an assortment of diamonds, of which he gave the
names and the weight, and the necessary tools.

Buckingham conducted the goldsmith to the chamber destined for him, and
which, at the end of half an hour, was transformed into a workshop. Then
he placed a sentinel at each door, with an order to admit nobody upon
any pretense but his VALET DE CHAMBRE, Patrick. We need not add that the
goldsmith, O’Reilly, and his assistant, were prohibited from going out
under any pretext. This point, settled, the duke turned to d’Artagnan.
“Now, my young friend,” said he, “England is all our own. What do you
wish for? What do you desire?”

“A bed, my Lord,” replied d’Artagnan. “At present, I confess, that is
the thing I stand most in need of.”

Buckingham gave d’Artagnan a chamber adjoining his own. He wished to
have the young man at hand--not that he at all mistrusted him, but for
the sake of having someone to whom he could constantly talk of the
queen.

In one hour after, the ordinance was published in London that no vessel
bound for France should leave port, not even the packet boat with
letters. In the eyes of everybody this was a declaration of war between
the two kingdoms.

On the day after the morrow, by eleven o’clock, the two diamond studs
were finished, and they were so completely imitated, so perfectly alike,
that Buckingham could not tell the new ones from the old ones, and
experts in such matters would have been deceived as he was. He
immediately called d’Artagnan. “Here,” said he to him, “are the diamond
studs that you came to bring; and be my witness that I have done all
that human power could do.”

“Be satisfied, my Lord, I will tell all that I have seen. But does your
Grace mean to give me the studs without the casket?”

“The casket would encumber you. Besides, the casket is the more precious
from being all that is left to me. You will say that I keep it.”

“I will perform your commission, word for word, my Lord.”

“And now,” resumed Buckingham, looking earnestly at the young man, “how
shall I ever acquit myself of the debt I owe you?”

D’Artagnan blushed up to the whites of his eyes. He saw that the duke
was searching for a means of making him accept something and the idea
that the blood of his friends and himself was about to be paid for with
English gold was strangely repugnant to him.

“Let us understand each other, my Lord,” replied d’Artagnan, “and let us
make things clear beforehand in order that there may be no mistake. I am
in the service of the King and Queen of France, and form part of the
company of Monsieur Dessessart, who, as well as his brother-in-law,
Monsieur de Treville, is particularly attached to their Majesties. What
I have done, then, has been for the queen, and not at all for your
Grace. And still further, it is very probable I should not have done
anything of this, if it had not been to make myself agreeable to someone
who is my lady, as the queen is yours.”

“Yes,” said the duke, smiling, “and I even believe that I know that
other person; it is--”

“My Lord, I have not named her!” interrupted the young man, warmly.

“That is true,” said the duke; “and it is to this person I am bound to
discharge my debt of gratitude.”

“You have said, my Lord; for truly, at this moment when there is
question of war, I confess to you that I see nothing in your Grace but
an Englishman, and consequently an enemy whom I should have much greater
pleasure in meeting on the field of battle than in the park at Windsor
or the corridors of the Louvre--all which, however, will not prevent me
from executing to the very point my commission or from laying down my
life, if there be need of it, to accomplish it; but I repeat it to your
Grace, without your having personally on that account more to thank me
for in this second interview than for what I did for you in the first.”

“We say, ‘Proud as a Scotsman,’” murmured the Duke of Buckingham.

“And we say, ‘Proud as a Gascon,’” replied d’Artagnan. “The Gascons are
the Scots of France.”

D’Artagnan bowed to the duke, and was retiring.

“Well, are you going away in that manner? Where, and how?”

“That’s true!”

“Fore Gad, these Frenchmen have no consideration!”

“I had forgotten that England was an island, and that you were the king
of it.”

“Go to the riverside, ask for the brig SUND, and give this letter to the
captain; he will convey you to a little port, where certainly you are
not expected, and which is ordinarily only frequented by fishermen.”

“The name of that port?”

“St. Valery; but listen. When you have arrived there you will go to a
mean tavern, without a name and without a sign--a mere fisherman’s hut.
You cannot be mistaken; there is but one.”

“Afterward?”

“You will ask for the host, and will repeat to him the word ‘Forward!’”

“Which means?”

“In French, EN AVANT. It is the password. He will give you a horse all
saddled, and will point out to you the road you ought to take. You will
find, in the same way, four relays on your route. If you will give at
each of these relays your address in Paris, the four horses will follow
you thither. You already know two of them, and you appeared to
appreciate them like a judge. They were those we rode on; and you may
rely upon me for the others not being inferior to them. These horses are
equipped for the field. However proud you may be, you will not refuse to
accept one of them, and to request your three companions to accept the
others--that is, in order to make war against us. Besides, the end
justified the means, as you Frenchmen say, does it not?”

“Yes, my Lord, I accept them,” said d’Artagnan; “and if it please God,
we will make a good use of your presents.”

“Well, now, your hand, young man. Perhaps we shall soon meet on the
field of battle; but in the meantime we shall part good friends, I
hope.”

“Yes, my Lord; but with the hope of soon becoming enemies.”

“Be satisfied; I promise you that.”

“I depend upon your word, my Lord.”

D’Artagnan bowed to the duke, and made his way as quickly as possible to
the riverside. Opposite the Tower of London he found the vessel that had
been named to him, delivered his letter to the captain, who after having
it examined by the governor of the port made immediate preparations to
sail.

Fifty vessels were waiting to set out. Passing alongside one of them,
d’Artagnan fancied he perceived on board it the woman of Meung--the same
whom the unknown gentleman had called Milady, and whom d’Artagnan had
thought so handsome; but thanks to the current of the stream and a fair
wind, his vessel passed so quickly that he had little more than a
glimpse of her.

The next day about nine o’clock in the morning, he landed at St. Valery.
D’Artagnan went instantly in search of the inn, and easily discovered it
by the riotous noise which resounded from it. War between England and
France was talked of as near and certain, and the jolly sailors were
having a carousal.

D’Artagnan made his way through the crowd, advanced toward the host, and
pronounced the word “Forward!” The host instantly made him a sign to
follow, went out with him by a door which opened into a yard, led him to
the stable, where a saddled horse awaited him, and asked him if he stood
in need of anything else.

“I want to know the route I am to follow,” said d’Artagnan.

“Go from hence to Blangy, and from Blangy to Neufchatel. At Neufchatel,
go to the tavern of the Golden Harrow, give the password to the
landlord, and you will find, as you have here, a horse ready saddled.”

“Have I anything to pay?” demanded d’Artagnan.

“Everything is paid,” replied the host, “and liberally. Begone, and may
God guide you!”

“Amen!” cried the young man, and set off at full gallop.

Four hours later he was in Neufchatel. He strictly followed the
instructions he had received. At Neufchatel, as at St. Valery, he found
a horse quite ready and awaiting him. He was about to remove the pistols
from the saddle he had quit to the one he was about to fill, but he
found the holsters furnished with similar pistols.

“Your address at Paris?”

“Hotel of the Guards, company of Dessessart.”

“Enough,” replied the questioner.

“Which route must I take?” demanded d’Artagnan, in his turn.

“That of Rouen; but you will leave the city on your right. You must stop
at the little village of Eccuis, in which there is but one tavern--the
Shield of France. Don’t condemn it from appearances; you will find a
horse in the stables quite as good as this.”

“The same password?”

“Exactly.”

“Adieu, master!”

“A good journey, gentlemen! Do you want anything?”

D’Artagnan shook his head, and set off at full speed. At Eccuis, the
same scene was repeated. He found as provident a host and a fresh horse.
He left his address as he had done before, and set off again at the same
pace for Pontoise. At Pontoise he changed his horse for the last time,
and at nine o’clock galloped into the yard of Treville’s hotel. He had
made nearly sixty leagues in little more than twelve hours.

M de Treville received him as if he had seen him that same morning;
only, when pressing his hand a little more warmly than usual, he
informed him that the company of Dessessart was on duty at the Louvre,
and that he might repair at once to his post.




22 THE BALLET OF LA MERLAISON


On the morrow, nothing was talked of in Paris but the ball which the
aldermen of the city were to give to the king and queen, and in which
their Majesties were to dance the famous La Merlaison--the favorite
ballet of the king.

Eight days had been occupied in preparations at the Hotel de Ville for
this important evening. The city carpenters had erected scaffolds upon
which the invited ladies were to be placed; the city grocer had
ornamented the chambers with two hundred FLAMBEAUX of white wax, a piece
of luxury unheard of at that period; and twenty violins were ordered,
and the price for them fixed at double the usual rate, upon condition,
said the report, that they should be played all night.

At ten o’clock in the morning the Sieur de la Coste, ensign in the
king’s Guards, followed by two officers and several archers of that
body, came to the city registrar, named Clement, and demanded of him all
the keys of the rooms and offices of the hotel. These keys were given up
to him instantly. Each of them had ticket attached to it, by which it
might be recognized; and from that moment the Sieur de la Coste was
charged with the care of all the doors and all the avenues.

At eleven o’clock came in his turn Duhallier, captain of the Guards,
bringing with him fifty archers, who were distributed immediately
through the Hotel de Ville, at the doors assigned them.

At three o’clock came two companies of the Guards, one French, the other
Swiss. The company of French guards was composed of half of M.
Duhallier’s men and half of M. Dessessart’s men.

At six in the evening the guests began to come. As fast as they entered,
they were placed in the grand saloon, on the platforms prepared for
them.

At nine o’clock Madame la Premiere Presidente arrived. As next to the
queen, she was the most considerable personage of the fete, she was
received by the city officials, and placed in a box opposite to that
which the queen was to occupy.

At ten o’clock, the king’s collation, consisting of preserves and other
delicacies, was prepared in the little room on the side of the church of
St. Jean, in front of the silver buffet of the city, which was guarded
by four archers.

At midnight great cries and loud acclamations were heard. It was the
king, who was passing through the streets which led from the Louvre to
the Hotel de Ville, and which were all illuminated with colored
lanterns.

Immediately the aldermen, clothed in their cloth robes and preceded by
six sergeants, each holding a FLAMBEAU in his hand, went to attend upon
the king, whom they met on the steps, where the provost of the merchants
made him the speech of welcome--a compliment to which his Majesty
replied with an apology for coming so late, laying the blame upon the
cardinal, who had detained him till eleven o’clock, talking of affairs
of state.

His Majesty, in full dress, was accompanied by his royal Highness, M. le
Comte de Soissons, by the Grand Prior, by the Duc de Longueville, by the
Duc d’Euboeuf, by the Comte d’Harcourt, by the Comte de la Roche-Guyon,
by M. de Liancourt, by M. de Baradas, by the Comte de Cramail, and by
the Chevalier de Souveray. Everybody noticed that the king looked dull
and preoccupied.

A private room had been prepared for the king and another for Monsieur.
In each of these closets were placed masquerade dresses. The same had
been done for the queen and Madame the President. The nobles and ladies
of their Majesties’ suites were to dress, two by two, in chambers
prepared for the purpose. Before entering his closet the king desired to
be informed the moment the cardinal arrived.

Half an hour after the entrance of the king, fresh acclamations were
heard; these announced the arrival of the queen. The aldermen did as
they had done before, and preceded by their sergeants, advanced to
receive their illustrious guest. The queen entered the great hall; and
it was remarked that, like the king, she looked dull and even weary.

At the moment she entered, the curtain of a small gallery which to that
time had been closed, was drawn, and the pale face of the cardinal
appeared, he being dressed as a Spanish cavalier. His eyes were fixed
upon those of the queen, and a smile of terrible joy passed over his
lips; the queen did not wear her diamond studs.

The queen remained for a short time to receive the compliments of the
city dignitaries and to reply to the salutations of the ladies. All at
once the king appeared with the cardinal at one of the doors of the
hall. The cardinal was speaking to him in a low voice, and the king was
very pale.

The king made his way through the crowd without a mask, and the ribbons
of his doublet scarcely tied. He went straight to the queen, and in an
altered voice said, “Why, madame, have you not thought proper to wear
your diamond studs, when you know it would give me so much
gratification?”

The queen cast a glance around her, and saw the cardinal behind, with a
diabolical smile on his countenance.

“Sire,” replied the queen, with a faltering voice, “because, in the
midst of such a crowd as this, I feared some accident might happen to
them.”

“And you were wrong, madame. If I made you that present it was that you
might adorn yourself therewith. I tell you that you were wrong.”

The voice of the king was tremulous with anger. Everybody looked and
listened with astonishment, comprehending nothing of what passed.

“Sire,” said the queen, “I can send for them to the Louvre, where they
are, and thus your Majesty’s wishes will be complied with.”

“Do so, madame, do so, and that at once; for within an hour the ballet
will commence.”

The queen bent in token of submission, and followed the ladies who were
to conduct her to her room. On his part the king returned to his
apartment.

There was a moment of trouble and confusion in the assembly. Everybody
had remarked that something had passed between the king and queen; but
both of them had spoken so low that everybody, out of respect, withdrew
several steps, so that nobody had heard anything. The violins began to
sound with all their might, but nobody listened to them.

The king came out first from his room. He was in a most elegant hunting
costume; and Monsieur and the other nobles were dressed like him. This
was the costume that best became the king. So dressed, he really
appeared the first gentleman of his kingdom.

The cardinal drew near to the king, and placed in his hand a small
casket. The king opened it, and found in it two diamond studs.

“What does this mean?” demanded he of the cardinal.

“Nothing,” replied the latter; “only, if the queen has the studs, which
I very much doubt, count them, sire, and if you only find ten, ask her
Majesty who can have stolen from her the two studs that are here.”

The king looked at the cardinal as if to interrogate him; but he had not
time to address any question to him--a cry of admiration burst from
every mouth. If the king appeared to be the first gentleman of his
kingdom, the queen was without doubt the most beautiful woman in France.

It is true that the habit of a huntress became her admirably. She wore a
beaver hat with blue feathers, a surtout of gray-pearl velvet, fastened
with diamond clasps, and a petticoat of blue satin, embroidered with
silver. On her left shoulder sparkled the diamond studs, on a bow of the
same color as the plumes and the petticoat.

The king trembled with joy and the cardinal with vexation; although,
distant as they were from the queen, they could not count the studs. The
queen had them. The only question was, had she ten or twelve?

At that moment the violins sounded the signal for the ballet. The king
advanced toward Madame the President, with whom he was to dance, and his
Highness Monsieur with the queen. They took their places, and the ballet
began.

The king danced facing the queen, and every time he passed by her, he
devoured with his eyes those studs of which he could not ascertain the
number. A cold sweat covered the brow of the cardinal.

The ballet lasted an hour, and had sixteen ENTREES. The ballet ended
amid the applause of the whole assemblage, and everyone reconducted his
lady to her place; but the king took advantage of the privilege he had
of leaving his lady, to advance eagerly toward the queen.

“I thank you, madame,” said he, “for the deference you have shown to my
wishes, but I think you want two of the studs, and I bring them back to
you.”

With these words he held out to the queen the two studs the cardinal had
given him.

“How, sire?” cried the young queen, affecting surprise, “you are giving
me, then, two more: I shall have fourteen.”

In fact the king counted them, and the twelve studs were all on her
Majesty’s shoulder.

The king called the cardinal.

“What does this mean, Monsieur Cardinal?” asked the king in a severe
tone.

“This means, sire,” replied the cardinal, “that I was desirous of
presenting her Majesty with these two studs, and that not daring to
offer them myself, I adopted this means of inducing her to accept them.”

“And I am the more grateful to your Eminence,” replied Anne of Austria,
with a smile that proved she was not the dupe of this ingenious
gallantry, “from being certain that these two studs alone have cost you
as much as all the others cost his Majesty.”

Then saluting the king and the cardinal, the queen resumed her way to
the chamber in which she had dressed, and where she was to take off her
costume.

The attention which we have been obliged to give, during the
commencement of the chapter, to the illustrious personages we have
introduced into it, has diverted us for an instant from him to whom Anne
of Austria owed the extraordinary triumph she had obtained over the
cardinal; and who, confounded, unknown, lost in the crowd gathered at
one of the doors, looked on at this scene, comprehensible only to four
persons--the king, the queen, his Eminence, and himself.

The queen had just regained her chamber, and d’Artagnan was about to
retire, when he felt his shoulder lightly touched. He turned and saw a
young woman, who made him a sign to follow her. The face of this young
woman was covered with a black velvet mask; but notwithstanding this
precaution, which was in fact taken rather against others than against
him, he at once recognized his usual guide, the light and intelligent
Mme. Bonacieux.

On the evening before, they had scarcely seen each other for a moment at
the apartment of the Swiss guard, Germain, whither d’Artagnan had sent
for her. The haste which the young woman was in to convey to the queen
the excellent news of the happy return of her messenger prevented the
two lovers from exchanging more than a few words. D’Artagnan therefore
followed Mme. Bonacieux moved by a double sentiment--love and curiosity.
All the way, and in proportion as the corridors became more deserted,
d’Artagnan wished to stop the young woman, seize her and gaze upon her,
were it only for a minute; but quick as a bird she glided between his
hands, and when he wished to speak to her, her finger placed upon her
mouth, with a little imperative gesture full of grace, reminded him that
he was under the command of a power which he must blindly obey, and
which forbade him even to make the slightest complaint. At length, after
winding about for a minute or two, Mme. Bonacieux opened the door of a
closet, which was entirely dark, and led d’Artagnan into it. There she
made a fresh sign of silence, and opened a second door concealed by
tapestry. The opening of this door disclosed a brilliant light, and she
disappeared.

D’Artagnan remained for a moment motionless, asking himself where he
could be; but soon a ray of light which penetrated through the chamber,
together with the warm and perfumed air which reached him from the same
aperture, the conversation of two of three ladies in language at once
respectful and refined, and the word “Majesty” several times repeated,
indicated clearly that he was in a closet attached to the queen’s
apartment. The young man waited in comparative darkness and listened.

The queen appeared cheerful and happy, which seemed to astonish the
persons who surrounded her and who were accustomed to see her almost
always sad and full of care. The queen attributed this joyous feeling to
the beauty of the fete, to the pleasure she had experienced in the
ballet; and as it is not permissible to contradict a queen, whether she
smile or weep, everybody expatiated on the gallantry of the aldermen of
the city of Paris.

Although d’Artagnan did not at all know the queen, he soon distinguished
her voice from the others, at first by a slightly foreign accent, and
next by that tone of domination naturally impressed upon all royal
words. He heard her approach and withdraw from the partially open door;
and twice or three times he even saw the shadow of a person intercept
the light.

At length a hand and an arm, surpassingly beautiful in their form and
whiteness, glided through the tapestry. D’Artagnan at once comprehended
that this was his recompense. He cast himself on his knees, seized the
hand, and touched it respectfully with his lips. Then the hand was
withdrawn, leaving in his an object which he perceived to be a ring. The
door immediately closed, and d’Artagnan found himself again in complete
obscurity.

D’Artagnan placed the ring on his finger, and again waited; it was
evident that all was not yet over. After the reward of his devotion,
that of his love was to come. Besides, although the ballet was danced,
the evening had scarcely begun. Supper was to be served at three, and
the clock of St. Jean had struck three quarters past two.

The sound of voices diminished by degrees in the adjoining chamber. The
company was then heard departing; then the door of the closet in which
d’Artagnan was, was opened, and Mme. Bonacieux entered.

“You at last?” cried d’Artagnan.

“Silence!” said the young woman, placing her hand upon his lips;
“silence, and go the same way you came!”

“But where and when shall I see you again?” cried d’Artagnan.

“A note which you will find at home will tell you. Begone, begone!”

At these words she opened the door of the corridor, and pushed
d’Artagnan out of the room. D’Artagnan obeyed like a child, without the
least resistance or objection, which proved that he was really in love.




23 THE RENDEZVOUS


D’Artagnan ran home immediately, and although it was three o’clock in
the morning and he had some of the worst quarters of Paris to traverse,
he met with no misadventure. Everyone knows that drunkards and lovers
have a protecting deity.

He found the door of his passage open, sprang up the stairs and knocked
softly in a manner agreed upon between him and his lackey. Planchet*,
whom he had sent home two hours before from the Hotel de Ville, telling
him to sit up for him, opened the door for him.

    _*The reader may ask, “How came Planchet here?” when he was left
            “stiff as a rush” in London. In the intervening time
            Buckingham perhaps sent him to Paris, as he did the
            horses._

“Has anyone brought a letter for me?” asked d’Artagnan, eagerly.

“No one has BROUGHT a letter, monsieur,” replied Planchet; “but one has
come of itself.”

“What do you mean, blockhead?”

“I mean to say that when I came in, although I had the key of your
apartment in my pocket, and that key had never quit me, I found a letter
on the green table cover in your bedroom.”

“And where is that letter?”

“I left it where I found it, monsieur. It is not natural for letters to
enter people’s houses in this manner. If the window had been open or
even ajar, I should think nothing of it; but, no--all was hermetically
sealed. Beware, monsieur; there is certainly some magic underneath.”

Meanwhile, the young man had darted in to his chamber, and opened the
letter. It was from Mme. Bonacieux, and was expressed in these terms:

“There are many thanks to be offered to you, and to be transmitted to
you. Be this evening about ten o’clock at St. Cloud, in front of the
pavilion which stands at the corner of the house of M. d’Estrees.--C.B.”

While reading this letter, d’Artagnan felt his heart dilated and
compressed by that delicious spasm which tortures and caresses the
hearts of lovers.

It was the first billet he had received; it was the first rendezvous
that had been granted him. His heart, swelled by the intoxication of
joy, felt ready to dissolve away at the very gate of that terrestrial
paradise called Love!

“Well, monsieur,” said Planchet, who had observed his master grow red
and pale successively, “did I not guess truly? Is it not some bad
affair?”

“You are mistaken, Planchet,” replied d’Artagnan; “and as a proof, there
is a crown to drink my health.”

“I am much obliged to Monsieur for the crown he had given me, and I
promise him to follow his instructions exactly; but it is not the less
true that letters which come in this way into shut-up houses--”

“Fall from heaven, my friend, fall from heaven.”

“Then Monsieur is satisfied?” asked Planchet.

“My dear Planchet, I am the happiest of men!”

“And I may profit by Monsieur’s happiness, and go to bed?”

“Yes, go.”

“May the blessings of heaven fall upon Monsieur! But it is not the less
true that that letter--”

And Planchet retired, shaking his head with an air of doubt, which the
liberality of d’Artagnan had not entirely effaced.

Left alone, d’Artagnan read and reread his billet. Then he kissed and
rekissed twenty times the lines traced by the hand of his beautiful
mistress. At length he went to bed, fell asleep, and had golden dreams.

At seven o’clock in the morning he arose and called Planchet, who at the
second summons opened the door, his countenance not yet quite freed from
the anxiety of the preceding night.

“Planchet,” said d’Artagnan, “I am going out for all day, perhaps. You
are, therefore, your own master till seven o’clock in the evening; but
at seven o’clock you must hold yourself in readiness with two horses.”

“There!” said Planchet. “We are going again, it appears, to have our
hides pierced in all sorts of ways.”

“You will take your musketoon and your pistols.”

“There, now! Didn’t I say so?” cried Planchet. “I was sure of it--the
cursed letter!”

“Don’t be afraid, you idiot; there is nothing in hand but a party of
pleasure.”

“Ah, like the charming journey the other day, when it rained bullets and
produced a crop of steel traps!”

“Well, if you are really afraid, Monsieur Planchet,” resumed d’Artagnan,
“I will go without you. I prefer traveling alone to having a companion
who entertains the least fear.”

“Monsieur does me wrong,” said Planchet; “I thought he had seen me at
work.”

“Yes, but I thought perhaps you had worn out all your courage the first
time.”

“Monsieur shall see that upon occasion I have some left; only I beg
Monsieur not to be too prodigal of it if he wishes it to last long.”

“Do you believe you have still a certain amount of it to expend this
evening?”

“I hope so, monsieur.”

“Well, then, I count on you.”

“At the appointed hour I shall be ready; only I believed that Monsieur
had but one horse in the Guard stables.”

“Perhaps there is but one at this moment; but by this evening there will
be four.”

“It appears that our journey was a remounting journey, then?”

“Exactly so,” said d’Artagnan; and nodding to Planchet, he went out.

M Bonacieux was at his door. D’Artagnan’s intention was to go out
without speaking to the worthy mercer; but the latter made so polite and
friendly a salutation that his tenant felt obliged, not only to stop,
but to enter into conversation with him.

Besides, how is it possible to avoid a little condescension toward a
husband whose pretty wife has appointed a meeting with you that same
evening at St. Cloud, opposite D’Estrees’s pavilion? D’Artagnan
approached him with the most amiable air he could assume.

The conversation naturally fell upon the incarceration of the poor man.
M. Bonacieux, who was ignorant that d’Artagnan had overheard his
conversation with the stranger of Meung, related to his young tenant the
persecutions of that monster, M. de Laffemas, whom he never ceased to
designate, during his account, by the title of the “cardinal’s
executioner,” and expatiated at great length upon the Bastille, the
bolts, the wickets, the dungeons, the gratings, the instruments of
torture.

D’Artagnan listened to him with exemplary complaisance, and when he had
finished said, “And Madame Bonacieux, do you know who carried her
off?--For I do not forget that I owe to that unpleasant circumstance the
good fortune of having made your acquaintance.”

“Ah!” said Bonacieux, “they took good care not to tell me that; and my
wife, on her part, has sworn to me by all that’s sacred that she does
not know. But you,” continued M. Bonacieux, in a tine of perfect good
fellowship, “what has become of you all these days? I have not seen you
nor your friends, and I don’t think you could gather all that dust that
I saw Planchet brush off your boots yesterday from the pavement of
Paris.”

“You are right, my dear Monsieur Bonacieux, my friends and I have been
on a little journey.”

“Far from here?”

“Oh, Lord, no! About forty leagues only. We went to take Monsieur Athos
to the waters of Forges, where my friends still remain.”

“And you have returned, have you not?” replied M. Bonacieux, giving to
his countenance a most sly air. “A handsome young fellow like you does
not obtain long leaves of absence from his mistress; and we were
impatiently waited for at Paris, were we not?”

“My faith!” said the young man, laughing, “I confess it, and so much
more the readily, my dear Bonacieux, as I see there is no concealing
anything from you. Yes, I was expected, and very impatiently, I
acknowledge.”

A slight shade passed over the brow of Bonacieux, but so slight that
d’Artagnan did not perceive it.

“And we are going to be recompensed for our diligence?” continued the
mercer, with a trifling alteration in his voice--so trifling, indeed,
that d’Artagnan did not perceive it any more than he had the momentary
shade which, an instant before, had darkened the countenance of the
worthy man.

“Ah, may you be a true prophet!” said d’Artagnan, laughing.

“No; what I say,” replied Bonacieux, “is only that I may know whether I
am delaying you.”

“Why that question, my dear host?” asked d’Artagnan. “Do you intend to
sit up for me?”

“No; but since my arrest and the robbery that was committed in my house,
I am alarmed every time I hear a door open, particularly in the night.
What the deuce can you expect? I am no swordsman.”

“Well, don’t be alarmed if I return at one, two or three o’clock in the
morning; indeed, do not be alarmed if I do not come at all.”

This time Bonacieux became so pale that d’Artagnan could not help
perceiving it, and asked him what was the matter.

“Nothing,” replied Bonacieux, “nothing. Since my misfortunes I have been
subject to faintnesses, which seize me all at once, and I have just felt
a cold shiver. Pay no attention to it; you have nothing to occupy
yourself with but being happy.”

“Then I have full occupation, for I am so.”

“Not yet; wait a little! This evening, you said.”

“Well, this evening will come, thank God! And perhaps you look for it
with as much impatience as I do; perhaps this evening Madame Bonacieux
will visit the conjugal domicile.”

“Madame Bonacieux is not at liberty this evening,” replied the husband,
seriously; “she is detained at the Louvre this evening by her duties.”

“So much the worse for you, my dear host, so much the worse! When I am
happy, I wish all the world to be so; but it appears that is not
possible.”

The young man departed, laughing at the joke, which he thought he alone
could comprehend.

“Amuse yourself well!” replied Bonacieux, in a sepulchral tone.

But d’Artagnan was too far off to hear him; and if he had heard him in
the disposition of mind he then enjoyed, he certainly would not have
remarked it.

He took his way toward the hotel of M. de Treville; his visit of the day
before, it is to be remembered, had been very short and very little
explicative.

He found Treville in a joyful mood. He had thought the king and queen
charming at the ball. It is true the cardinal had been particularly
ill-tempered. He had retired at one o’clock under the pretense of being
indisposed. As to their Majesties, they did not return to the Louvre
till six o’clock in the morning.

“Now,” said Treville, lowering his voice, and looking into every corner
of the apartment to see if they were alone, “now let us talk about
yourself, my young friend; for it is evident that your happy return has
something to do with the joy of the king, the triumph of the queen, and
the humiliation of his Eminence. You must look out for yourself.”

“What have I to fear,” replied d’Artagnan, “as long as I shall have the
luck to enjoy the favor of their Majesties?”

“Everything, believe me. The cardinal is not the man to forget a
mystification until he has settled account with the mystifier; and the
mystifier appears to me to have the air of being a certain young Gascon
of my acquaintance.”

“Do you believe that the cardinal is as well posted as yourself, and
knows that I have been to London?”

“The devil! You have been to London! Was it from London you brought that
beautiful diamond that glitters on your finger? Beware, my dear
d’Artagnan! A present from an enemy is not a good thing. Are there not
some Latin verses upon that subject? Stop!”

“Yes, doubtless,” replied d’Artagnan, who had never been able to cram
the first rudiments of that language into his head, and who had by his
ignorance driven his master to despair, “yes, doubtless there is one.”

“There certainly is one,” said M. de Treville, who had a tincture of
literature, “and Monsieur de Benserade was quoting it to me the other
day. Stop a minute--ah, this is it: ‘Timeo Danaos et dona ferentes,’
which means, ‘Beware of the enemy who makes you presents.”

“This diamond does not come from an enemy, monsieur,” replied
d’Artagnan, “it comes from the queen.”

“From the queen! Oh, oh!” said M. de Treville. “Why, it is indeed a true
royal jewel, which is worth a thousand pistoles if it is worth a denier.
By whom did the queen send you this jewel?”

“She gave it to me herself.”

“Where?”

“In the room adjoining the chamber in which she changed her toilet.”

“How?”

“Giving me her hand to kiss.”

“You have kissed the queen’s hand?” said M. de Treville, looking
earnestly at d’Artagnan.

“Her Majesty did me the honor to grant me that favor.”

“And that in the presence of witnesses! Imprudent, thrice imprudent!”

“No, monsieur, be satisfied; nobody saw her,” replied d’Artagnan, and he
related to M. de Treville how the affair came to pass.

“Oh, the women, the women!” cried the old soldier. “I know them by their
romantic imagination. Everything that savors of mystery charms them. So
you have seen the arm, that was all. You would meet the queen, and she
would not know who you are?”

“No; but thanks to this diamond,” replied the young man.

“Listen,” said M. de Treville; “shall I give you counsel, good counsel,
the counsel of a friend?”

“You will do me honor, monsieur,” said d’Artagnan.

“Well, then, off to the nearest goldsmith’s, and sell that diamond for
the highest price you can get from him. However much of a Jew he may be,
he will give you at least eight hundred pistoles. Pistoles have no name,
young man, and that ring has a terrible one, which may betray him who
wears it.”

“Sell this ring, a ring which comes from my sovereign? Never!” said
d’Artagnan.

“Then, at least turn the gem inside, you silly fellow; for everybody
must be aware that a cadet from Gascony does not find such stones in his
mother’s jewel case.”

“You think, then, I have something to dread?” asked d’Artagnan.

“I mean to say, young man, that he who sleeps over a mine the match of
which is already lighted, may consider himself in safety in comparison
with you.”

“The devil!” said d’Artagnan, whom the positive tone of M. de Treville
began to disquiet, “the devil! What must I do?”

“Above all things be always on your guard. The cardinal has a tenacious
memory and a long arm; you may depend upon it, he will repay you by some
ill turn.”

“But of what sort?”

“Eh! How can I tell? Has he not all the tricks of a demon at his
command? The least that can be expected is that you will be arrested.”

“What! Will they dare to arrest a man in his Majesty’s service?”

“PARDIEU! They did not scruple much in the case of Athos. At all events,
young man, rely upon one who has been thirty years at court. Do not lull
yourself in security, or you will be lost; but, on the contrary--and it
is I who say it--see enemies in all directions. If anyone seeks a
quarrel with you, shun it, were it with a child of ten years old. If you
are attacked by day or by night, fight, but retreat, without shame; if
you cross a bridge, feel every plank of it with your foot, lest one
should give way beneath you; if you pass before a house which is being
built, look up, for fear a stone should fall upon your head; if you stay
out late, be always followed by your lackey, and let your lackey be
armed--if, by the by, you can be sure of your lackey. Mistrust
everybody, your friend, your brother, your mistress--your mistress above
all.”

D’Artagnan blushed.

“My mistress above all,” repeated he, mechanically; “and why her rather
than another?”

“Because a mistress is one of the cardinal’s favorite means; he has not
one that is more expeditious. A woman will sell you for ten pistoles,
witness Delilah. You are acquainted with the Scriptures?”

D’Artagnan thought of the appointment Mme. Bonacieux had made with him
for that very evening; but we are bound to say, to the credit of our
hero, that the bad opinion entertained by M. de Treville of women in
general, did not inspire him with the least suspicion of his pretty
hostess.

“But, A PROPOS,” resumed M. de Treville, “what has become of your three
companions?”

“I was about to ask you if you had heard any news of them?”

“None, monsieur.”

“Well, I left them on my road--Porthos at Chantilly, with a duel on his
hands; Aramis at Crevecoeur, with a ball in his shoulder; and Athos at
Amiens, detained by an accusation of coining.”

“See there, now!” said M. de Treville; “and how the devil did you
escape?”

“By a miracle, monsieur, I must acknowledge, with a sword thrust in my
breast, and by nailing the Comte de Wardes on the byroad to Calais, like
a butterfly on a tapestry.”

“There again! De Wardes, one of the cardinal’s men, a cousin of
Rochefort! Stop, my friend, I have an idea.”

“Speak, monsieur.”

“In your place, I would do one thing.”

“What?”

“While his Eminence was seeking for me in Paris, I would take, without
sound of drum or trumpet, the road to Picardy, and would go and make
some inquiries concerning my three companions. What the devil! They
merit richly that piece of attention on your part.”

“The advice is good, monsieur, and tomorrow I will set out.”

“Tomorrow! Any why not this evening?”

“This evening, monsieur, I am detained in Paris by indispensable
business.”

“Ah, young man, young man, some flirtation or other. Take care, I repeat
to you, take care. It is woman who has ruined us, still ruins us, and
will ruin us, as long as the world stands. Take my advice and set out
this evening.”

“Impossible, monsieur.”

“You have given your word, then?”

“Yes, monsieur.”

“Ah, that’s quite another thing; but promise me, if you should not be
killed tonight, that you will go tomorrow.”

“I promise it.”

“Do you need money?”

“I have still fifty pistoles. That, I think, is as much as I shall
want.”

“But your companions?”

“I don’t think they can be in need of any. We left Paris, each with
seventy-five pistoles in his pocket.”

“Shall I see you again before your departure?”

“I think not, monsieur, unless something new should happen.”

“Well, a pleasant journey.”

“Thanks, monsieur.”

D’Artagnan left M. de Treville, touched more than ever by his paternal
solicitude for his Musketeers.

He called successively at the abodes of Athos, Porthos, and Aramis.
Neither of them had returned. Their lackeys likewise were absent, and
nothing had been heard of either the one or the other. He would have
inquired after them of their mistresses, but he was neither acquainted
with Porthos’s nor Aramis’s, and as to Athos, he had none.

As he passed the Hotel des Gardes, he took a glance in to the stables.
Three of the four horses had already arrived. Planchet, all
astonishment, was busy grooming them, and had already finished two.

“Ah, monsieur,” said Planchet, on perceiving d’Artagnan, “how glad I am
to see you.”

“Why so, Planchet?” asked the young man.

“Do you place confidence in our landlord--Monsieur Bonacieux?”

“I? Not the least in the world.”

“Oh, you do quite right, monsieur.”

“But why this question?”

“Because, while you were talking with him, I watched you without
listening to you; and, monsieur, his countenance changed color two or
three times!”

“Bah!”

“Preoccupied as Monsieur was with the letter he had received, he did not
observe that; but I, whom the strange fashion in which that letter came
into the house had placed on my guard--I did not lose a movement of his
features.”

“And you found it?”

“Traitorous, monsieur.”

“Indeed!”

“Still more; as soon as Monsieur had left and disappeared round the
corner of the street, Monsieur Bonacieux took his hat, shut his door,
and set off at a quick pace in an opposite direction.”

“It seems you are right, Planchet; all this appears to be a little
mysterious; and be assured that we will not pay him our rent until the
matter shall be categorically explained to us.”

“Monsieur jests, but Monsieur will see.”

“What would you have, Planchet? What must come is written.”

“Monsieur does not then renounce his excursion for this evening?”

“Quite the contrary, Planchet; the more ill will I have toward Monsieur
Bonacieux, the more punctual I shall be in keeping the appointment made
by that letter which makes you so uneasy.”

“Then that is Monsieur’s determination?”

“Undeniably, my friend. At nine o’clock, then, be ready here at the
hotel, I will come and take you.”

Planchet seeing there was no longer any hope of making his master
renounce his project, heaved a profound sigh and set to work to groom
the third horse.

As to d’Artagnan, being at bottom a prudent youth, instead of returning
home, went and dined with the Gascon priest, who, at the time of the
distress of the four friends, had given them a breakfast of chocolate.




24 THE PAVILION


At nine o’clock d’Artagnan was at the Hotel des Gardes; he found
Planchet all ready. The fourth horse had arrived.

Planchet was armed with his musketoon and a pistol. D’Artagnan had his
sword and placed two pistols in his belt; then both mounted and departed
quietly. It was quite dark, and no one saw them go out. Planchet took
place behind his master, and kept at a distance of ten paces from him.

D’Artagnan crossed the quays, went out by the gate of La Conference and
followed the road, much more beautiful then than it is now, which leads
to St. Cloud.

As long as he was in the city, Planchet kept at the respectful distance
he had imposed upon himself; but as soon as the road began to be more
lonely and dark, he drew softly nearer, so that when they entered the
Bois de Boulogne he found himself riding quite naturally side by side
with his master. In fact, we must not dissemble that the oscillation of
the tall trees and the reflection of the moon in the dark underwood gave
him serious uneasiness. D’Artagnan could not help perceiving that
something more than usual was passing in the mind of his lackey and
said, “Well, Monsieur Planchet, what is the matter with us now?”

“Don’t you think, monsieur, that woods are like churches?”

“How so, Planchet?”

“Because we dare not speak aloud in one or the other.”

“But why did you not dare to speak aloud, Planchet--because you are
afraid?”

“Afraid of being heard? Yes, monsieur.”

“Afraid of being heard! Why, there is nothing improper in our
conversation, my dear Planchet, and no one could find fault with it.”

“Ah, monsieur!” replied Planchet, recurring to his besetting idea, “that
Monsieur Bonacieux has something vicious in his eyebrows, and something
very unpleasant in the play of his lips.”

“What the devil makes you think of Bonacieux?”

“Monsieur, we think of what we can, and not of what we will.”

“Because you are a coward, Planchet.”

“Monsieur, we must not confound prudence with cowardice; prudence is a
virtue.”

“And you are very virtuous, are you not, Planchet?”

“Monsieur, is not that the barrel of a musket which glitters yonder? Had
we not better lower our heads?”

“In truth,” murmured d’Artagnan, to whom M. de Treville’s recommendation
recurred, “this animal will end by making me afraid.” And he put his
horse into a trot.

Planchet followed the movements of his master as if he had been his
shadow, and was soon trotting by his side.

“Are we going to continue this pace all night?” asked Planchet.

“No; you are at your journey’s end.”

“How, monsieur! And you?”

“I am going a few steps farther.”

“And Monsieur leaves me here alone?”

“You are afraid, Planchet?”

“No; I only beg leave to observe to Monsieur that the night will be very
cold, that chills bring on rheumatism, and that a lackey who has the
rheumatism makes but a poor servant, particularly to a master as active
as Monsieur.”

“Well, if you are cold, Planchet, you can go into one of those cabarets
that you see yonder, and be in waiting for me at the door by six o’clock
in the morning.”

“Monsieur, I have eaten and drunk respectfully the crown you gave me
this morning, so that I have not a sou left in case I should be cold.”

“Here’s half a pistole. Tomorrow morning.”

D’Artagnan sprang from his horse, threw the bridle to Planchet, and
departed at a quick pace, folding his cloak around him.

“Good Lord, how cold I am!” cried Planchet, as soon as he had lost sight
of his master; and in such haste was he to warm himself that he went
straight to a house set out with all the attributes of a suburban
tavern, and knocked at the door.

In the meantime d’Artagnan, who had plunged into a bypath, continued his
route and reached St. Cloud; but instead of following the main street he
turned behind the chateau, reached a sort of retired lane, and found
himself soon in front of the pavilion named. It was situated in a very
private spot. A high wall, at the angle of which was the pavilion, ran
along one side of this lane, and on the other was a little garden
connected with a poor cottage which was protected by a hedge from
passers-by.

He gained the place appointed, and as no signal had been given him by
which to announce his presence, he waited.

Not the least noise was to be heard; it might be imagined that he was a
hundred miles from the capital. D’Artagnan leaned against the hedge,
after having cast a glance behind it. Beyond that hedge, that garden,
and that cottage, a dark mist enveloped with its folds that immensity
where Paris slept--a vast void from which glittered a few luminous
points, the funeral stars of that hell!

But for d’Artagnan all aspects were clothed happily, all ideas wore a
smile, all shades were diaphanous. The appointed hour was about to
strike. In fact, at the end of a few minutes the belfry of St. Cloud let
fall slowly ten strokes from its sonorous jaws. There was something
melancholy in this brazen voice pouring out its lamentations in the
middle of the night; but each of those strokes, which made up the
expected hour, vibrated harmoniously to the heart of the young man.

His eyes were fixed upon the little pavilion situated at the angle of
the wall, of which all the windows were closed with shutters, except one
on the first story. Through this window shone a mild light which
silvered the foliage of two or three linden trees which formed a group
outside the park. There could be no doubt that behind this little
window, which threw forth such friendly beams, the pretty Mme. Bonacieux
expected him.

Wrapped in this sweet idea, d’Artagnan waited half an hour without the
least impatience, his eyes fixed upon that charming little abode of
which he could perceive a part of the ceiling with its gilded moldings,
attesting the elegance of the rest of the apartment.

The belfry of St. Cloud sounded half past ten.

This time, without knowing why, d’Artagnan felt a cold shiver run
through his veins. Perhaps the cold began to affect him, and he took a
perfectly physical sensation for a moral impression.

Then the idea seized him that he had read incorrectly, and that the
appointment was for eleven o’clock. He drew near to the window, and
placing himself so that a ray of light should fall upon the letter as he
held it, he drew it from his pocket and read it again; but he had not
been mistaken, the appointment was for ten o’clock. He went and resumed
his post, beginning to be rather uneasy at this silence and this
solitude.

Eleven o’clock sounded.

D’Artagnan began now really to fear that something had happened to Mme.
Bonacieux. He clapped his hands three times--the ordinary signal of
lovers; but nobody replied to him, not even an echo.

He then thought, with a touch of vexation, that perhaps the young woman
had fallen asleep while waiting for him. He approached the wall, and
tried to climb it; but the wall had been recently pointed, and
d’Artagnan could get no hold.

At that moment he thought of the trees, upon whose leaves the light
still shone; and as one of them drooped over the road, he thought that
from its branches he might get a glimpse of the interior of the
pavilion.

The tree was easy to climb. Besides, d’Artagnan was but twenty years
old, and consequently had not yet forgotten his schoolboy habits. In an
instant he was among the branches, and his keen eyes plunged through the
transparent panes into the interior of the pavilion.

It was a strange thing, and one which made d’Artagnan tremble from the
sole of his foot to the roots of his hair, to find that this soft light,
this calm lamp, enlightened a scene of fearful disorder. One of the
windows was broken, the door of the chamber had been beaten in and hung,
split in two, on its hinges. A table, which had been covered with an
elegant supper, was overturned. The decanters broken in pieces, and the
fruits crushed, strewed the floor. Everything in the apartment gave
evidence of a violent and desperate struggle. D’Artagnan even fancied he
could recognize amid this strange disorder, fragments of garments, and
some bloody spots staining the cloth and the curtains. He hastened to
descend into the street, with a frightful beating at his heart; he
wished to see if he could find other traces of violence.

The little soft light shone on in the calmness of the night. D’Artagnan
then perceived a thing that he had not before remarked--for nothing had
led him to the examination--that the ground, trampled here and
hoofmarked there, presented confused traces of men and horses. Besides,
the wheels of a carriage, which appeared to have come from Paris, had
made a deep impression in the soft earth, which did not extend beyond
the pavilion, but turned again toward Paris.

At length d’Artagnan, in pursuing his researches, found near the wall a
woman’s torn glove. This glove, wherever it had not touched the muddy
ground, was of irreproachable odor. It was one of those perfumed gloves
that lovers like to snatch from a pretty hand.

As d’Artagnan pursued his investigations, a more abundant and more icy
sweat rolled in large drops from his forehead; his heart was oppressed
by a horrible anguish; his respiration was broken and short. And yet he
said, to reassure himself, that this pavilion perhaps had nothing in
common with Mme. Bonacieux; that the young woman had made an appointment
with him before the pavilion, and not in the pavilion; that she might
have been detained in Paris by her duties, or perhaps by the jealousy of
her husband.

But all these reasons were combated, destroyed, overthrown, by that
feeling of intimate pain which, on certain occasions, takes possession
of our being, and cries to us so as to be understood unmistakably that
some great misfortune is hanging over us.

Then d’Artagnan became almost wild. He ran along the high road, took the
path he had before taken, and reaching the ferry, interrogated the
boatman.

About seven o’clock in the evening, the boatman had taken over a young
woman, wrapped in a black mantle, who appeared to be very anxious not to
be recognized; but entirely on account of her precautions, the boatman
had paid more attention to her and discovered that she was young and
pretty.

There were then, as now, a crowd of young and pretty women who came to
St. Cloud, and who had reasons for not being seen, and yet d’Artagnan
did not for an instant doubt that it was Mme. Bonacieux whom the boatman
had noticed.

D’Artagnan took advantage of the lamp which burned in the cabin of the
ferryman to read the billet of Mme. Bonacieux once again, and satisfy
himself that he had not been mistaken, that the appointment was at St.
Cloud and not elsewhere, before the D’Estrees’s pavilion and not in
another street. Everything conspired to prove to d’Artagnan that his
presentiments had not deceived him, and that a great misfortune had
happened.

He again ran back to the chateau. It appeared to him that something
might have happened at the pavilion in his absence, and that fresh
information awaited him. The lane was still deserted, and the same calm
soft light shone through the window.

D’Artagnan then thought of that cottage, silent and obscure, which had
no doubt seen all, and could tell its tale. The gate of the enclosure
was shut; but he leaped over the hedge, and in spite of the barking of a
chained-up dog, went up to the cabin.

No one answered to his first knocking. A silence of death reigned in the
cabin as in the pavilion; but as the cabin was his last resource, he
knocked again.

It soon appeared to him that he heard a slight noise within--a timid
noise which seemed to tremble lest it should be heard.

Then d’Artagnan ceased knocking, and prayed with an accent so full of
anxiety and promises, terror and cajolery, that his voice was of a
nature to reassure the most fearful. At length an old, worm-eaten
shutter was opened, or rather pushed ajar, but closed again as soon as
the light from a miserable lamp which burned in the corner had shone
upon the baldric, sword belt, and pistol pommels of d’Artagnan.
Nevertheless, rapid as the movement had been, d’Artagnan had had time to
get a glimpse of the head of an old man.

“In the name of heaven!” cried he, “listen to me; I have been waiting
for someone who has not come. I am dying with anxiety. Has anything
particular happened in the neighborhood? Speak!”

The window was again opened slowly, and the same face appeared, only it
was now still more pale than before.

D’Artagnan related his story simply, with the omission of names. He told
how he had a rendezvous with a young woman before that pavilion, and
how, not seeing her come, he had climbed the linden tree, and by the
light of the lamp had seen the disorder of the chamber.

The old man listened attentively, making a sign only that it was all so;
and then, when d’Artagnan had ended, he shook his head with an air that
announced nothing good.

“What do you mean?” cried d’Artagnan. “In the name of heaven, explain
yourself!”

“Oh! Monsieur,” said the old man, “ask me nothing; for if I dared tell
you what I have seen, certainly no good would befall me.”

“You have, then, seen something?” replied d’Artagnan. “In that case, in
the name of heaven,” continued he, throwing him a pistole, “tell me what
you have seen, and I will pledge you the word of a gentleman that not
one of your words shall escape from my heart.”

The old man read so much truth and so much grief in the face of the
young man that he made him a sign to listen, and repeated in a low
voice: “It was scarcely nine o’clock when I heard a noise in the street,
and was wondering what it could be, when on coming to my door, I found
that somebody was endeavoring to open it. As I am very poor and am not
afraid of being robbed, I went and opened the gate and saw three men at
a few paces from it. In the shadow was a carriage with two horses, and
some saddlehorses. These horses evidently belonged to the three men, who
were dressed as cavaliers. ‘Ah, my worthy gentlemen,’ cried I, ‘what do
you want?’ ‘You must have a ladder?’ said he who appeared to be the
leader of the party. ‘Yes, monsieur, the one with which I gather my
fruit.’ ‘Lend it to us, and go into your house again; there is a crown
for the annoyance we have caused you. Only remember this--if you speak a
word of what you may see or what you may hear (for you will look and you
will listen, I am quite sure, however we may threaten you), you are
lost.’ At these words he threw me a crown, which I picked up, and he
took the ladder. After shutting the gate behind them, I pretended to
return to the house, but I immediately went out a back door, and
stealing along in the shade of the hedge, I gained yonder clump of
elder, from which I could hear and see everything. The three men brought
the carriage up quietly, and took out of it a little man, stout, short,
elderly, and commonly dressed in clothes of a dark color, who ascended
the ladder very carefully, looked suspiciously in at the window of the
pavilion, came down as quietly as he had gone up, and whispered, ‘It is
she!’ Immediately, he who had spoken to me approached the door of the
pavilion, opened it with a key he had in his hand, closed the door and
disappeared, while at the same time the other two men ascended the
ladder. The little old man remained at the coach door; the coachman took
care of his horses, the lackey held the saddlehorses. All at once great
cries resounded in the pavilion, and a woman came to the window, and
opened it, as if to throw herself out of it; but as soon as she
perceived the other two men, she fell back and they went into the
chamber. Then I saw no more; but I heard the noise of breaking
furniture. The woman screamed, and cried for help; but her cries were
soon stifled. Two of the men appeared, bearing the woman in their arms,
and carried her to the carriage, into which the little old man got after
her. The leader closed the window, came out an instant after by the
door, and satisfied himself that the woman was in the carriage. His two
companions were already on horseback. He sprang into his saddle; the
lackey took his place by the coachman; the carriage went off at a quick
pace, escorted by the three horsemen, and all was over. From that moment
I have neither seen nor heard anything.”

D’Artagnan, entirely overcome by this terrible story, remained
motionless and mute, while all the demons of anger and jealousy were
howling in his heart.

“But, my good gentleman,” resumed the old man, upon whom this mute
despair certainly produced a greater effect than cries and tears would
have done, “do not take on so; they did not kill her, and that’s a
comfort.”

“Can you guess,” said d’Artagnan, “who was the man who headed this
infernal expedition?”

“I don’t know him.”

“But as you spoke to him you must have seen him.”

“Oh, it’s a description you want?”

“Exactly so.”

“A tall, dark man, with black mustaches, dark eyes, and the air of a
gentleman.”

“That’s the man!” cried d’Artagnan, “again he, forever he! He is my
demon, apparently. And the other?”

“Which?”

“The short one.”

“Oh, he was not a gentleman, I’ll answer for it; besides, he did not
wear a sword, and the others treated him with small consideration.”

“Some lackey,” murmured d’Artagnan. “Poor woman, poor woman, what have
they done with you?”

“You have promised to be secret, my good monsieur?” said the old man.

“And I renew my promise. Be easy, I am a gentleman. A gentleman has but
his word, and I have given you mine.”

With a heavy heart, d’Artagnan again bent his way toward the ferry.
Sometimes he hoped it could not be Mme. Bonacieux, and that he should
find her next day at the Louvre; sometimes he feared she had had an
intrigue with another, who, in a jealous fit, had surprised her and
carried her off. His mind was torn by doubt, grief, and despair.

“Oh, if I had my three friends here,” cried he, “I should have, at
least, some hopes of finding her; but who knows what has become of
them?”

It was past midnight; the next thing was to find Planchet. D’Artagnan
went successively into all the cabarets in which there was a light, but
could not find Planchet in any of them.

At the sixth he began to reflect that the search was rather dubious.
D’Artagnan had appointed six o’clock in the morning for his lackey, and
wherever he might be, he was right.

Besides, it came into the young man’s mind that by remaining in the
environs of the spot on which this sad event had passed, he would,
perhaps, have some light thrown upon the mysterious affair. At the sixth
cabaret, then, as we said, d’Artagnan stopped, asked for a bottle of
wine of the best quality, and placing himself in the darkest corner of
the room, determined thus to wait till daylight; but this time again his
hopes were disappointed, and although he listened with all his ears, he
heard nothing, amid the oaths, coarse jokes, and abuse which passed
between the laborers, servants, and carters who comprised the honorable
society of which he formed a part, which could put him upon the least
track of her who had been stolen from him. He was compelled, then, after
having swallowed the contents of his bottle, to pass the time as well as
to evade suspicion, to fall into the easiest position in his corner and
to sleep, whether well or ill. D’Artagnan, be it remembered, was only
twenty years old, and at that age sleep has its imprescriptible rights
which it imperiously insists upon, even with the saddest hearts.

Toward six o’clock d’Artagnan awoke with that uncomfortable feeling
which generally accompanies the break of day after a bad night. He was
not long in making his toilet. He examined himself to see if advantage
had been taken of his sleep, and having found his diamond ring on his
finger, his purse in his pocket, and his pistols in his belt, he rose,
paid for his bottle, and went out to try if he could have any better
luck in his search after his lackey than he had had the night before.
The first thing he perceived through the damp gray mist was honest
Planchet, who, with the two horses in hand, awaited him at the door of a
little blind cabaret, before which d’Artagnan had passed without even a
suspicion of its existence.




25 PORTHOS


Instead of returning directly home, d’Artagnan alighted at the door of
M. de Treville, and ran quickly up the stairs. This time he had decided
to relate all that had passed. M. de Treville would doubtless give him
good advice as to the whole affair. Besides, as M. de Treville saw the
queen almost daily, he might be able to draw from her Majesty some
intelligence of the poor young woman, whom they were doubtless making
pay very dearly for her devotedness to her mistress.

M de Treville listened to the young man’s account with a seriousness
which proved that he saw something else in this adventure besides a love
affair. When d’Artagnan had finished, he said, “Hum! All this savors of
his Eminence, a league off.”

“But what is to be done?” said d’Artagnan.

“Nothing, absolutely nothing, at present, but quitting Paris, as I told
you, as soon as possible. I will see the queen; I will relate to her the
details of the disappearance of this poor woman, of which she is no
doubt ignorant. These details will guide her on her part, and on your
return, I shall perhaps have some good news to tell you. Rely on me.”

D’Artagnan knew that, although a Gascon, M. de Treville was not in the
habit of making promises, and that when by chance he did promise, he
more than kept his word. He bowed to him, then, full of gratitude for
the past and for the future; and the worthy captain, who on his side
felt a lively interest in this young man, so brave and so resolute,
pressed his hand kindly, wishing him a pleasant journey.

Determined to put the advice of M. de Treville in practice instantly,
d’Artagnan directed his course toward the Rue des Fossoyeurs, in order
to superintend the packing of his valise. On approaching the house, he
perceived M. Bonacieux in morning costume, standing at his threshold.
All that the prudent Planchet had said to him the preceding evening
about the sinister character of the old man recurred to the mind of
d’Artagnan, who looked at him with more attention than he had done
before. In fact, in addition to that yellow, sickly paleness which
indicates the insinuation of the bile in the blood, and which might,
besides, be accidental, d’Artagnan remarked something perfidiously
significant in the play of the wrinkled features of his countenance. A
rogue does not laugh in the same way that an honest man does; a
hypocrite does not shed the tears of a man of good faith. All falsehood
is a mask; and however well made the mask may be, with a little
attention we may always succeed in distinguishing it from the true face.

It appeared, then, to d’Artagnan that M. Bonacieux wore a mask, and
likewise that that mask was most disagreeable to look upon. In
consequence of this feeling of repugnance, he was about to pass without
speaking to him, but, as he had done the day before, M. Bonacieux
accosted him.

“Well, young man,” said he, “we appear to pass rather gay nights! Seven
o’clock in the morning! PESTE! You seem to reverse ordinary customs, and
come home at the hour when other people are going out.”

“No one can reproach you for anything of the kind, Monsieur Bonacieux,”
said the young man; “you are a model for regular people. It is true that
when a man possesses a young and pretty wife, he has no need to seek
happiness elsewhere. Happiness comes to meet him, does it not, Monsieur
Bonacieux?”

Bonacieux became as pale as death, and grinned a ghastly smile.

“Ah, ah!” said Bonacieux, “you are a jocular companion! But where the
devil were you gladding last night, my young master? It does not appear
to be very clean in the crossroads.”

D’Artagnan glanced down at his boots, all covered with mud; but that
same glance fell upon the shoes and stockings of the mercer, and it
might have been said they had been dipped in the same mud heap. Both
were stained with splashes of mud of the same appearance.

Then a sudden idea crossed the mind of d’Artagnan. That little stout
man, short and elderly, that sort of lackey, dressed in dark clothes,
treated without ceremony by the men wearing swords who composed the
escort, was Bonacieux himself. The husband had presided at the abduction
of his wife.

A terrible inclination seized d’Artagnan to grasp the mercer by the
throat and strangle him; but, as we have said, he was a very prudent
youth, and he restrained himself. However, the revolution which appeared
upon his countenance was so visible that Bonacieux was terrified at it,
and he endeavored to draw back a step or two; but as he was standing
before the half of the door which was shut, the obstacle compelled him
to keep his place.

“Ah, but you are joking, my worthy man!” said d’Artagnan. “It appears to
me that if my boots need a sponge, your stockings and shoes stand in
equal need of a brush. May you not have been philandering a little also,
Monsieur Bonacieux? Oh, the devil! That’s unpardonable in a man of your
age, and who besides, has such a pretty wife as yours.”

“Oh, Lord! no,” said Bonacieux, “but yesterday I went to St. Mande to
make some inquiries after a servant, as I cannot possibly do without
one; and the roads were so bad that I brought back all this mud, which I
have not yet had time to remove.”

The place named by Bonacieux as that which had been the object of his
journey was a fresh proof in support of the suspicions d’Artagnan had
conceived. Bonacieux had named Mande because Mande was in an exactly
opposite direction from St. Cloud. This probability afforded him his
first consolation. If Bonacieux knew where his wife was, one might, by
extreme means, force the mercer to open his teeth and let his secret
escape. The question, then, was how to change this probability into a
certainty.

“Pardon, my dear Monsieur Bonacieux, if I don’t stand upon ceremony,”
said d’Artagnan, “but nothing makes one so thirsty as want of sleep. I
am parched with thirst. Allow me to take a glass of water in your
apartment; you know that is never refused among neighbors.”

Without waiting for the permission of his host, d’Artagnan went quickly
into the house, and cast a rapid glance at the bed. It had not been
used. Bonacieux had not been abed. He had only been back an hour or two;
he had accompanied his wife to the place of her confinement, or else at
least to the first relay.

“Thanks, Monsieur Bonacieux,” said d’Artagnan, emptying his glass, “that
is all I wanted of you. I will now go up into my apartment. I will make
Planchet brush my boots; and when he has done, I will, if you like, send
him to you to brush your shoes.”

He left the mercer quite astonished at his singular farewell, and asking
himself if he had not been a little inconsiderate.

At the top of the stairs he found Planchet in a great fright.

“Ah, monsieur!” cried Planchet, as soon as he perceived his master,
“here is more trouble. I thought you would never come in.”

“What’s the matter now, Planchet?” demanded d’Artagnan.

“Oh! I give you a hundred, I give you a thousand times to guess,
monsieur, the visit I received in your absence.”

“When?”

“About half an hour ago, while you were at Monsieur de Treville’s.”

“Who has been here? Come, speak.”

“Monsieur de Cavois.”

“Monsieur de Cavois?”

“In person.”

“The captain of the cardinal’s Guards?”

“Himself.”

“Did he come to arrest me?”

“I have no doubt that he did, monsieur, for all his wheedling manner.”

“Was he so sweet, then?”

“Indeed, he was all honey, monsieur.”

“Indeed!”

“He came, he said, on the part of his Eminence, who wished you well, and
to beg you to follow him to the Palais-Royal*.”

    _*It was called the Palais-Cardinal before Richelieu gave it to
            the King._

“What did you answer him?”

“That the thing was impossible, seeing that you were not at home, as he
could see.”

“Well, what did he say then?”

“That you must not fail to call upon him in the course of the day; and
then he added in a low voice, ‘Tell your master that his Eminence is
very well disposed toward him, and that his fortune perhaps depends upon
this interview.’”

“The snare is rather MALADROIT for the cardinal,” replied the young man,
smiling.

“Oh, I saw the snare, and I answered you would be quite in despair on
your return.

“‘Where has he gone?’ asked Monsieur de Cavois.

“‘To Troyes, in Champagne,’ I answered.

“‘And when did he set out?’

“‘Yesterday evening.’”

“Planchet, my friend,” interrupted d’Artagnan, “you are really a
precious fellow.”

“You will understand, monsieur, I thought there would be still time, if
you wish, to see Monsieur de Cavois to contradict me by saying you were
not yet gone. The falsehood would then lie at my door, and as I am not a
gentleman, I may be allowed to lie.”

“Be of good heart, Planchet, you shall preserve your reputation as a
veracious man. In a quarter of an hour we set off.”

“That’s the advice I was about to give Monsieur; and where are we going,
may I ask, without being too curious?”

“PARDIEU! In the opposite direction to that which you said I was gone.
Besides, are you not as anxious to learn news of Grimaud, Mousqueton,
and Bazin as I am to know what has become of Athos, Porthos, and
Aramis?”

“Yes, monsieur,” said Planchet, “and I will go as soon as you please.
Indeed, I think provincial air will suit us much better just now than
the air of Paris. So then--”

“So then, pack up our luggage, Planchet, and let us be off. On my part,
I will go out with my hands in my pockets, that nothing may be
suspected. You may join me at the Hotel des Gardes. By the way,
Planchet, I think you are right with respect to our host, and that he is
decidedly a frightfully low wretch.”

“Ah, monsieur, you may take my word when I tell you anything. I am a
physiognomist, I assure you.”

D’Artagnan went out first, as had been agreed upon. Then, in order that
he might have nothing to reproach himself with, he directed his steps,
for the last time, toward the residences of his three friends. No news
had been received of them; only a letter, all perfumed and of an elegant
writing in small characters, had come for Aramis. D’Artagnan took charge
of it. Ten minutes afterward Planchet joined him at the stables of the
Hotel des Gardes. D’Artagnan, in order that there might be no time lost,
had saddled his horse himself.

“That’s well,” said he to Planchet, when the latter added the
portmanteau to the equipment. “Now saddle the other three horses.”

“Do you think, then, monsieur, that we shall travel faster with two
horses apiece?” said Planchet, with his shrewd air.

“No, Monsieur Jester,” replied d’Artagnan; “but with our four horses we
may bring back our three friends, if we should have the good fortune to
find them living.”

“Which is a great chance,” replied Planchet, “but we must not despair of
the mercy of God.”

“Amen!” said d’Artagnan, getting into his saddle.

As they went from the Hotel des Gardes, they separated, leaving the
street at opposite ends, one having to quit Paris by the Barriere de la
Villette and the other by the Barriere Montmartre, to meet again beyond
St. Denis--a strategic maneuver which, having been executed with equal
punctuality, was crowned with the most fortunate results. D’Artagnan and
Planchet entered Pierrefitte together.

Planchet was more courageous, it must be admitted, by day than by night.
His natural prudence, however, never forsook him for a single instant.
He had forgotten not one of the incidents of the first journey, and he
looked upon everybody he met on the road as an enemy. It followed that
his hat was forever in his hand, which procured him some severe
reprimands from d’Artagnan, who feared that his excess of politeness
would lead people to think he was the lackey of a man of no consequence.

Nevertheless, whether the passengers were really touched by the urbanity
of Planchet or whether this time nobody was posted on the young man’s
road, our two travelers arrived at Chantilly without any accident, and
alighted at the tavern of Great St. Martin, the same at which they had
stopped on their first journey.

The host, on seeing a young man followed by a lackey with two extra
horses, advanced respectfully to the door. Now, as they had already
traveled eleven leagues, d’Artagnan thought it time to stop, whether
Porthos were or were not in the inn. Perhaps it would not be prudent to
ask at once what had become of the Musketeer. The result of these
reflections was that d’Artagnan, without asking information of any kind,
alighted, commended the horses to the care of his lackey, entered a
small room destined to receive those who wished to be alone, and desired
the host to bring him a bottle of his best wine and as good a breakfast
as possible--a desire which further corroborated the high opinion the
innkeeper had formed of the traveler at first sight.

D’Artagnan was therefore served with miraculous celerity. The regiment
of the Guards was recruited among the first gentlemen of the kingdom;
and d’Artagnan, followed by a lackey, and traveling with four
magnificent horses, despite the simplicity of his uniform, could not
fail to make a sensation. The host desired himself to serve him; which
d’Artagnan perceiving, ordered two glasses to be brought, and commenced
the following conversation.

“My faith, my good host,” said d’Artagnan, filling the two glasses, “I
asked for a bottle of your best wine, and if you have deceived me, you
will be punished in what you have sinned; for seeing that I hate
drinking by myself, you shall drink with me. Take your glass, then, and
let us drink. But what shall we drink to, so as to avoid wounding any
susceptibility? Let us drink to the prosperity of your establishment.”

“Your Lordship does me much honor,” said the host, “and I thank you
sincerely for your kind wish.”

“But don’t mistake,” said d’Artagnan, “there is more selfishness in my
toast than perhaps you may think--for it is only in prosperous
establishments that one is well received. In hotels that do not
flourish, everything is in confusion, and the traveler is a victim to
the embarrassments of his host. Now, I travel a great deal, particularly
on this road, and I wish to see all innkeepers making a fortune.”

“It seems to me,” said the host, “that this is not the first time I have
had the honor of seeing Monsieur.”

“Bah, I have passed perhaps ten times through Chantilly, and out of the
ten times I have stopped three or four times at your house at least. Why
I was here only ten or twelve days ago. I was conducting some friends,
Musketeers, one of whom, by the by, had a dispute with a stranger--a man
who sought a quarrel with him, for I don’t know what.”

“Exactly so,” said the host; “I remember it perfectly. It is not
Monsieur Porthos that your Lordship means?”

“Yes, that is my companion’s name. My God, my dear host, tell me if
anything has happened to him?”

“Your Lordship must have observed that he could not continue his
journey.”

“Why, to be sure, he promised to rejoin us, and we have seen nothing of
him.”

“He has done us the honor to remain here.”

“What, he had done you the honor to remain here?”

“Yes, monsieur, in this house; and we are even a little uneasy--”

“On what account?”

“Of certain expenses he has contracted.”

“Well, but whatever expenses he may have incurred, I am sure he is in a
condition to pay them.”

“Ah, monsieur, you infuse genuine balm into my blood. We have made
considerable advances; and this very morning the surgeon declared that
if Monsieur Porthos did not pay him, he should look to me, as it was I
who had sent for him.”

“Porthos is wounded, then?”

“I cannot tell you, monsieur.”

“What! You cannot tell me? Surely you ought to be able to tell me better
than any other person.”

“Yes; but in our situation we must not say all we know--particularly as
we have been warned that our ears should answer for our tongues.”

“Well, can I see Porthos?”

“Certainly, monsieur. Take the stairs on your right; go up the first
flight and knock at Number One. Only warn him that it is you.”

“Why should I do that?”

“Because, monsieur, some mischief might happen to you.”

“Of what kind, in the name of wonder?”

“Monsieur Porthos may imagine you belong to the house, and in a fit of
passion might run his sword through you or blow out your brains.”

“What have you done to him, then?”

“We have asked him for money.”

“The devil! Ah, I can understand that. It is a demand that Porthos takes
very ill when he is not in funds; but I know he must be so at present.”

“We thought so, too, monsieur. As our house is carried on very
regularly, and we make out our bills every week, at the end of eight
days we presented our account; but it appeared we had chosen an unlucky
moment, for at the first word on the subject, he sent us to all the
devils. It is true he had been playing the day before.”

“Playing the day before! And with whom?”

“Lord, who can say, monsieur? With some gentleman who was traveling this
way, to whom he proposed a game of LANSQUENET.”

“That’s it, then, and the foolish fellow lost all he had?”

“Even to his horse, monsieur; for when the gentleman was about to set
out, we perceived that his lackey was saddling Monsieur Porthos’s horse,
as well as his master’s. When we observed this to him, he told us all to
trouble ourselves about our own business, as this horse belonged to him.
We also informed Monsieur Porthos of what was going on; but he told us
we were scoundrels to doubt a gentleman’s word, and that as he had said
the horse was his, it must be so.”

“That’s Porthos all over,” murmured d’Artagnan.

“Then,” continued the host, “I replied that as from the moment we seemed
not likely to come to a good understanding with respect to payment, I
hoped that he would have at least the kindness to grant the favor of his
custom to my brother host of the Golden Eagle; but Monsieur Porthos
replied that, my house being the best, he should remain where he was.
This reply was too flattering to allow me to insist on his departure. I
confined myself then to begging him to give up his chamber, which is the
handsomest in the hotel, and to be satisfied with a pretty little room
on the third floor; but to this Monsieur Porthos replied that as he
every moment expected his mistress, who was one of the greatest ladies
in the court, I might easily comprehend that the chamber he did me the
honor to occupy in my house was itself very mean for the visit of such a
personage. Nevertheless, while acknowledging the truth of what he said,
I thought proper to insist; but without even giving himself the trouble
to enter into any discussion with me, he took one of his pistols, laid
it on his table, day and night, and said that at the first word that
should be spoken to him about removing, either within the house or out
of it, he would blow out the brains of the person who should be so
imprudent as to meddle with a matter which only concerned himself. Since
that time, monsieur, nobody entered his chamber but his servant.”

“What! Mousqueton is here, then?”

“Oh, yes, monsieur. Five days after your departure, he came back, and in
a very bad condition, too. It appears that he had met with
disagreeableness, likewise, on his journey. Unfortunately, he is more
nimble than his master; so that for the sake of his master, he puts us
all under his feet, and as he thinks we might refuse what he asked for,
he takes all he wants without asking at all.”

“The fact is,” said d’Artagnan, “I have always observed a great degree
of intelligence and devotedness in Mousqueton.”

“That is possible, monsieur; but suppose I should happen to be brought
in contact, even four times a year, with such intelligence and
devotedness--why, I should be a ruined man!”

“No, for Porthos will pay you.”

“Hum!” said the host, in a doubtful tone.

“The favorite of a great lady will not be allowed to be inconvenienced
for such a paltry sum as he owes you.”

“If I durst say what I believe on that head--”

“What you believe?”

“I ought rather to say, what I know.”

“What you know?”

“And even what I am sure of.”

“And of what are you so sure?”

“I would say that I know this great lady.”

“You?”

“Yes; I.”

“And how do you know her?”

“Oh, monsieur, if I could believe I might trust in your discretion.”

“Speak! By the word of a gentleman, you shall have no cause to repent of
your confidence.”

“Well, monsieur, you understand that uneasiness makes us do many
things.”

“What have you done?”

“Oh, nothing which was not right in the character of a creditor.”

“Well?”

“Monsieur Porthos gave us a note for his duchess, ordering us to put it
in the post. This was before his servant came. As he could not leave his
chamber, it was necessary to charge us with this commission.”

“And then?”

“Instead of putting the letter in the post, which is never safe, I took
advantage of the journey of one of my lads to Paris, and ordered him to
convey the letter to this duchess himself. This was fulfilling the
intentions of Monsieur Porthos, who had desired us to be so careful of
this letter, was it not?”

“Nearly so.”

“Well, monsieur, do you know who this great lady is?”

“No; I have heard Porthos speak of her, that’s all.”

“Do you know who this pretended duchess is?

“I repeat to you, I don’t know her.”

“Why, she is the old wife of a procurator* of the Chatelet, monsieur,
named Madame Coquenard, who, although she is at least fifty, still gives
herself jealous airs. It struck me as very odd that a princess should
live in the Rue aux Ours.”

    _*Attorney_

“But how do you know all this?”

“Because she flew into a great passion on receiving the letter, saying
that Monsieur Porthos was a weathercock, and that she was sure it was
for some woman he had received this wound.”

“Has he been wounded, then?”

“Oh, good Lord! What have I said?”

“You said that Porthos had received a sword cut.”

“Yes, but he has forbidden me so strictly to say so.”

“And why so.”

“Zounds, monsieur! Because he had boasted that he would perforate the
stranger with whom you left him in dispute; whereas the stranger, on the
contrary, in spite of all his rodomontades quickly threw him on his
back. As Monsieur Porthos is a very boastful man, he insists that nobody
shall know he has received this wound except the duchess, whom he
endeavored to interest by an account of his adventure.”

“It is a wound that confines him to his bed?”

“Ah, and a master stroke, too, I assure you. Your friend’s soul must
stick tight to his body.”

“Were you there, then?”

“Monsieur, I followed them from curiosity, so that I saw the combat
without the combatants seeing me.”

“And what took place?”

“Oh! The affair was not long, I assure you. They placed themselves on
guard; the stranger made a feint and a lunge, and that so rapidly that
when Monsieur Porthos came to the PARADE, he had already three inches of
steel in his breast. He immediately fell backward. The stranger placed
the point of his sword at his throat; and Monsieur Porthos, finding
himself at the mercy of his adversary, acknowledged himself conquered.
Upon which the stranger asked his name, and learning that it was
Porthos, and not d’Artagnan, he assisted him to rise, brought him back
to the hotel, mounted his horse, and disappeared.”

“So it was with Monsieur d’Artagnan this stranger meant to quarrel?”

“It appears so.”

“And do you know what has become of him?”

“No, I never saw him until that moment, and have not seen him since.”

“Very well; I know all that I wish to know. Porthos’s chamber is, you
say, on the first story, Number One?”

“Yes, monsieur, the handsomest in the inn--a chamber that I could have
let ten times over.”

“Bah! Be satisfied,” said d’Artagnan, laughing, “Porthos will pay you
with the money of the Duchess Coquenard.”

“Oh, monsieur, procurator’s wife or duchess, if she will but loosen her
pursestrings, it will be all the same; but she positively answered that
she was tired of the exigencies and infidelities of Monsieur Porthos,
and that she would not send him a denier.”

“And did you convey this answer to your guest?”

“We took good care not to do that; he would have found in what fashion
we had executed his commission.”

“So that he still expects his money?”

“Oh, Lord, yes, monsieur! Yesterday he wrote again; but it was his
servant who this time put the letter in the post.”

“Do you say the procurator’s wife is old and ugly?”

“Fifty at least, monsieur, and not at all handsome, according to
Pathaud’s account.”

“In that case, you may be quite at ease; she will soon be softened.
Besides, Porthos cannot owe you much.”

“How, not much! Twenty good pistoles, already, without reckoning the
doctor. He denies himself nothing; it may easily be seen he has been
accustomed to live well.”

“Never mind; if his mistress abandons him, he will find friends, I will
answer for it. So, my dear host, be not uneasy, and continue to take all
the care of him that his situation requires.”

“Monsieur has promised me not to open his mouth about the procurator’s
wife, and not to say a word of the wound?”

“That’s agreed; you have my word.”

“Oh, he would kill me!”

“Don’t be afraid; he is not so much of a devil as he appears.”

Saying these words, d’Artagnan went upstairs, leaving his host a little
better satisfied with respect to two things in which he appeared to be
very much interested--his debt and his life.

At the top of the stairs, upon the most conspicuous door of the
corridor, was traced in black ink a gigantic number “1.” d’Artagnan
knocked, and upon the bidding to come in which came from inside, he
entered the chamber.

Porthos was in bed, and was playing a game at LANSQUENET with
Mousqueton, to keep his hand in; while a spit loaded with partridges was
turning before the fire, and on each side of a large chimneypiece, over
two chafing dishes, were boiling two stewpans, from which exhaled a
double odor of rabbit and fish stews, rejoicing to the smell. In
addition to this he perceived that the top of a wardrobe and the marble
of a commode were covered with empty bottles.

At the sight of his friend, Porthos uttered a loud cry of joy; and
Mousqueton, rising respectfully, yielded his place to him, and went to
give an eye to the two stewpans, of which he appeared to have the
particular inspection.

“Ah, PARDIEU! Is that you?” said Porthos to d’Artagnan. “You are right
welcome. Excuse my not coming to meet you; but,” added he, looking at
d’Artagnan with a certain degree of uneasiness, “you know what has
happened to me?”

“No.”

“Has the host told you nothing, then?”

“I asked after you, and came up as soon as I could.”

Porthos seemed to breathe more freely.

“And what has happened to you, my dear Porthos?” continued d’Artagnan.

“Why, on making a thrust at my adversary, whom I had already hit three
times, and whom I meant to finish with the fourth, I put my foot on a
stone, slipped, and strained my knee.”

“Truly?”

“Honor! Luckily for the rascal, for I should have left him dead on the
spot, I assure you.”

“And what has became of him?”

“Oh, I don’t know; he had enough, and set off without waiting for the
rest. But you, my dear d’Artagnan, what has happened to you?”

“So that this strain of the knee,” continued d’Artagnan, “my dear
Porthos, keeps you in bed?”

“My God, that’s all. I shall be about again in a few days.”

“Why did you not have yourself conveyed to Paris? You must be cruelly
bored here.”

“That was my intention; but, my dear friend, I have one thing to confess
to you.”

“What’s that?”

“It is that as I was cruelly bored, as you say, and as I had the
seventy-five pistoles in my pocket which you had distributed to me, in
order to amuse myself I invited a gentleman who was traveling this way
to walk up, and proposed a cast of dice. He accepted my challenge, and,
my faith, my seventy-five pistoles passed from my pocket to his, without
reckoning my horse, which he won into the bargain. But you, my dear
d’Artagnan?”

“What can you expect, my dear Porthos; a man is not privileged in all
ways,” said d’Artagnan. “You know the proverb ‘Unlucky at play, lucky in
love.’ You are too fortunate in your love for play not to take its
revenge. What consequence can the reverses of fortune be to you? Have
you not, happy rogue that you are--have you not your duchess, who cannot
fail to come to your aid?”

“Well, you see, my dear d’Artagnan, with what ill luck I play,” replied
Porthos, with the most careless air in the world. “I wrote to her to
send me fifty louis or so, of which I stood absolutely in need on
account of my accident.”

“Well?”

“Well, she must be at her country seat, for she has not answered me.”

“Truly?”

“No; so I yesterday addressed another epistle to her, still more
pressing than the first. But you are here, my dear fellow, let us speak
of you. I confess I began to be very uneasy on your account.”

“But your host behaves very well toward you, as it appears, my dear
Porthos,” said d’Artagnan, directing the sick man’s attention to the
full stewpans and the empty bottles.

“So, so,” replied Porthos. “Only three or four days ago the impertinent
jackanapes gave me his bill, and I was forced to turn both him and his
bill out of the door; so that I am here something in the fashion of a
conqueror, holding my position, as it were, my conquest. So you see,
being in constant fear of being forced from that position, I am armed to
the teeth.”

“And yet,” said d’Artagnan, laughing, “it appears to me that from time
to time you must make SORTIES.” And he again pointed to the bottles and
the stewpans.

“Not I, unfortunately!” said Porthos. “This miserable strain confines me
to my bed; but Mousqueton forages, and brings in provisions. Friend
Mousqueton, you see that we have a reinforcement, and we must have an
increase of supplies.”

“Mousqueton,” said d’Artagnan, “you must render me a service.”

“What, monsieur?”

“You must give your recipe to Planchet. I may be besieged in my turn,
and I shall not be sorry for him to be able to let me enjoy the same
advantages with which you gratify your master.”

“Lord, monsieur! There is nothing more easy,” said Mousqueton, with a
modest air. “One only needs to be sharp, that’s all. I was brought up in
the country, and my father in his leisure time was something of a
poacher.”

“And what did he do the rest of his time?”

“Monsieur, he carried on a trade which I have always thought
satisfactory.”

“Which?”

“As it was a time of war between the Catholics and the Huguenots, and as
he saw the Catholics exterminate the Huguenots and the Huguenots
exterminate the Catholics--all in the name of religion--he adopted a
mixed belief which permitted him to be sometimes Catholic, sometimes a
Huguenot. Now, he was accustomed to walk with his fowling piece on his
shoulder, behind the hedges which border the roads, and when he saw a
Catholic coming alone, the Protestant religion immediately prevailed in
his mind. He lowered his gun in the direction of the traveler; then,
when he was within ten paces of him, he commenced a conversation which
almost always ended by the traveler’s abandoning his purse to save his
life. It goes without saying that when he saw a Huguenot coming, he felt
himself filled with such ardent Catholic zeal that he could not
understand how, a quarter of an hour before, he had been able to have
any doubts upon the superiority of our holy religion. For my part,
monsieur, I am Catholic--my father, faithful to his principles, having
made my elder brother a Huguenot.”

“And what was the end of this worthy man?” asked d’Artagnan.

“Oh, of the most unfortunate kind, monsieur. One day he was surprised in
a lonely road between a Huguenot and a Catholic, with both of whom he
had before had business, and who both knew him again; so they united
against him and hanged him on a tree. Then they came and boasted of
their fine exploit in the cabaret of the next village, where my brother
and I were drinking.”

“And what did you do?” said d’Artagnan.

“We let them tell their story out,” replied Mousqueton. “Then, as in
leaving the cabaret they took different directions, my brother went and
hid himself on the road of the Catholic, and I on that of the Huguenot.
Two hours after, all was over; we had done the business of both,
admiring the foresight of our poor father, who had taken the precaution
to bring each of us up in a different religion.”

“Well, I must allow, as you say, your father was a very intelligent
fellow. And you say in his leisure moments the worthy man was a
poacher?”

“Yes, monsieur, and it was he who taught me to lay a snare and ground a
line. The consequence is that when I saw our laborers, which did not at
all suit two such delicate stomachs as ours, I had recourse to a little
of my old trade. While walking near the wood of Monsieur le Prince, I
laid a few snare in the runs; and while reclining on the banks of his
Highness’s pieces of water, I slipped a few lines into his fish ponds.
So that now, thanks be to God, we do not want, as Monsieur can testify,
for partridges, rabbits, carp or eels--all light, wholesome food,
suitable for the sick.”

“But the wine,” said d’Artagnan, “who furnishes the wine? Your host?”

“That is to say, yes and no.”

“How yes and no?”

“He furnishes it, it is true, but he does not know that he has that
honor.”

“Explain yourself, Mousqueton; your conversation is full of instructive
things.”

“That is it, monsieur. It has so chanced that I met with a Spaniard in
my peregrinations who had seen many countries, and among them the New
World.”

“What connection can the New World have with the bottles which are on
the commode and the wardrobe?”

“Patience, monsieur, everything will come in its turn.”

“This Spaniard had in his service a lackey who had accompanied him in
his voyage to Mexico. This lackey was my compatriot; and we became the
more intimate from there being many resemblances of character between
us. We loved sporting of all kinds better than anything; so that he
related to me how in the plains of the Pampas the natives hunt the tiger
and the wild bull with simple running nooses which they throw to a
distance of twenty or thirty paces the end of a cord with such nicety;
but in face of the proof I was obliged to acknowledge the truth of the
recital. My friend placed a bottle at the distance of thirty paces, and
at each cast he caught the neck of the bottle in his running noose. I
practiced this exercise, and as nature has endowed me with some
faculties, at this day I can throw the lasso with any man in the world.
Well, do you understand, monsieur? Our host has a well-furnished cellar
the key of which never leaves him; only this cellar has a ventilating
hole. Now through this ventilating hole I throw my lasso, and as I now
know in which part of the cellar is the best wine, that’s my point for
sport. You see, monsieur, what the New World has to do with the bottles
which are on the commode and the wardrobe. Now, will you taste our wine,
and without prejudice say what you think of it?”

“Thank you, my friend, thank you; unfortunately, I have just
breakfasted.”

“Well,” said Porthos, “arrange the table, Mousqueton, and while we
breakfast, d’Artagnan will relate to us what has happened to him during
the ten days since he left us.”

“Willingly,” said d’Artagnan.

While Porthos and Mousqueton were breakfasting, with the appetites of
convalescents and with that brotherly cordiality which unites men in
misfortune, d’Artagnan related how Aramis, being wounded, was obliged to
stop at Crevecoeur, how he had left Athos fighting at Amiens with four
men who accused him of being a coiner, and how he, d’Artagnan, had been
forced to run the Comtes de Wardes through the body in order to reach
England.

But there the confidence of d’Artagnan stopped. He only added that on
his return from Great Britain he had brought back four magnificent
horses--one for himself, and one for each of his companions; then he
informed Porthos that the one intended for him was already installed in
the stable of the tavern.

At this moment Planchet entered, to inform his master that the horses
were sufficiently refreshed and that it would be possible to sleep at
Clermont.

As d’Artagnan was tolerably reassured with regard to Porthos, and as he
was anxious to obtain news of his two other friends, he held out his
hand to the wounded man, and told him he was about to resume his route
in order to continue his researches. For the rest, as he reckoned upon
returning by the same route in seven or eight days, if Porthos were
still at the Great St. Martin, he would call for him on his way.

Porthos replied that in all probability his sprain would not permit him
to depart yet awhile. Besides, it was necessary he should stay at
Chantilly to wait for the answer from his duchess.

D’Artagnan wished that answer might be prompt and favorable; and having
again recommended Porthos to the care of Mousqueton, and paid his bill
to the host, he resumed his route with Planchet, already relieved of one
of his led horses.




26 ARAMIS AND HIS THESIS


D’Artagnan had said nothing to Porthos of his wound or of his
procurator’s wife. Our Bearnais was a prudent lad, however young he
might be. Consequently he had appeared to believe all that the
vainglorious Musketeer had told him, convinced that no friendship will
hold out against a surprised secret. Besides, we feel always a sort of
mental superiority over those whose lives we know better than they
suppose. In his projects of intrigue for the future, and determined as
he was to make his three friends the instruments of his fortune,
d’Artagnan was not sorry at getting into his grasp beforehand the
invisible strings by which he reckoned upon moving them.

And yet, as he journeyed along, a profound sadness weighed upon his
heart. He thought of that young and pretty Mme. Bonacieux who was to
have paid him the price of his devotedness; but let us hasten to say
that this sadness possessed the young man less from the regret of the
happiness he had missed, than from the fear he entertained that some
serious misfortune had befallen the poor woman. For himself, he had no
doubt she was a victim of the cardinal’s vengeance; and, as was well
known, the vengeance of his Eminence was terrible. How he had found
grace in the eyes of the minister, he did not know; but without doubt M.
de Cavois would have revealed this to him if the captain of the Guards
had found him at home.

Nothing makes time pass more quickly or more shortens a journey than a
thought which absorbs in itself all the faculties of the organization of
him who thinks. External existence then resembles a sleep of which this
thought is the dream. By its influence, time has no longer measure,
space has no longer distance. We depart from one place, and arrive at
another, that is all. Of the interval passed, nothing remains in the
memory but a vague mist in which a thousand confused images of trees,
mountains, and landscapes are lost. It was as a prey to this
hallucination that d’Artagnan traveled, at whatever pace his horse
pleased, the six or eight leagues that separated Chantilly from
Crevecoeur, without his being able to remember on his arrival in the
village any of the things he had passed or met with on the road.

There only his memory returned to him. He shook his head, perceived the
cabaret at which he had left Aramis, and putting his horse to the trot,
he shortly pulled up at the door.

This time it was not a host but a hostess who received him. D’Artagnan
was a physiognomist. His eye took in at a glance the plump, cheerful
countenance of the mistress of the place, and he at once perceived there
was no occasion for dissembling with her, or of fearing anything from
one blessed with such a joyous physiognomy.

“My good dame,” asked d’Artagnan, “can you tell me what has become of
one of my friends, whom we were obliged to leave here about a dozen days
ago?”

“A handsome young man, three- or four-and-twenty years old, mild,
amiable, and well made?”

“That is he--wounded in the shoulder.”

“Just so. Well, monsieur, he is still here.”

“Ah, PARDIEU! My dear dame,” said d’Artagnan, springing from his horse,
and throwing the bridle to Planchet, “you restore me to life; where is
this dear Aramis? Let me embrace him, I am in a hurry to see him again.”

“Pardon, monsieur, but I doubt whether he can see you at this moment.”

“Why so? Has he a lady with him?”

“Jesus! What do you mean by that? Poor lad! No, monsieur, he has not a
lady with him.”

“With whom is he, then?”

“With the curate of Montdidier and the superior of the Jesuits of
Amiens.”

“Good heavens!” cried d’Artagnan, “is the poor fellow worse, then?”

“No, monsieur, quite the contrary; but after his illness grace touched
him, and he determined to take orders.”

“That’s it!” said d’Artagnan, “I had forgotten that he was only a
Musketeer for a time.”

“Monsieur still insists upon seeing him?”

“More than ever.”

“Well, monsieur has only to take the right-hand staircase in the
courtyard, and knock at Number Five on the second floor.”

D’Artagnan walked quickly in the direction indicated, and found one of
those exterior staircases that are still to be seen in the yards of our
old-fashioned taverns. But there was no getting at the place of sojourn
of the future abbe; the defiles of the chamber of Aramis were as well
guarded as the gardens of Armida. Bazin was stationed in the corridor,
and barred his passage with the more intrepidity that, after many years
of trial, Bazin found himself near a result of which he had ever been
ambitious.

In fact, the dream of poor Bazin had always been to serve a churchman;
and he awaited with impatience the moment, always in the future, when
Aramis would throw aside the uniform and assume the cassock. The
daily-renewed promise of the young man that the moment would not long be
delayed, had alone kept him in the service of a Musketeer--a service in
which, he said, his soul was in constant jeopardy.

Bazin was then at the height of joy. In all probability, this time his
master would not retract. The union of physical pain with moral
uneasiness had produced the effect so long desired. Aramis, suffering at
once in body and mind, had at length fixed his eyes and his thoughts
upon religion, and he had considered as a warning from heaven the double
accident which had happened to him; that is to say, the sudden
disappearance of his mistress and the wound in his shoulder.

It may be easily understood that in the present disposition of his
master nothing could be more disagreeable to Bazin than the arrival of
d’Artagnan, which might cast his master back again into that vortex of
mundane affairs which had so long carried him away. He resolved, then,
to defend the door bravely; and as, betrayed by the mistress of the inn,
he could not say that Aramis was absent, he endeavored to prove to the
newcomer that it would be the height of indiscretion to disturb his
master in his pious conference, which had commenced with the morning and
would not, as Bazin said, terminate before night.

But d’Artagnan took very little heed of the eloquent discourse of M.
Bazin; and as he had no desire to support a polemic discussion with his
friend’s valet, he simply moved him out of the way with one hand, and
with the other turned the handle of the door of Number Five. The door
opened, and d’Artagnan went into the chamber.

Aramis, in a black gown, his head enveloped in a sort of round flat cap,
not much unlike a CALOTTE, was seated before an oblong table, covered
with rolls of paper and enormous volumes in folio. At his right hand was
placed the superior of the Jesuits, and on his left the curate of
Montdidier. The curtains were half drawn, and only admitted the
mysterious light calculated for beatific reveries. All the mundane
objects that generally strike the eye on entering the room of a young
man, particularly when that young man is a Musketeer, had disappeared as
if by enchantment; and for fear, no doubt, that the sight of them might
bring his master back to ideas of this world, Bazin had laid his hands
upon sword, pistols, plumed hat, and embroideries and laces of all kinds
and sorts. In their stead d’Artagnan thought he perceived in an obscure
corner a discipline cord suspended from a nail in the wall.

At the noise made by d’Artagnan in entering, Aramis lifted up his head,
and beheld his friend; but to the great astonishment of the young man,
the sight of him did not produce much effect upon the Musketeer, so
completely was his mind detached from the things of this world.

“Good day, dear d’Artagnan,” said Aramis; “believe me, I am glad to see
you.”

“So am I delighted to see you,” said d’Artagnan, “although I am not yet
sure that it is Aramis I am speaking to.”

“To himself, my friend, to himself! But what makes you doubt it?”

“I was afraid I had made a mistake in the chamber, and that I had found
my way into the apartment of some churchman. Then another error seized
me on seeing you in company with these gentlemen--I was afraid you were
dangerously ill.”

The two men in black, who guessed d’Artagnan’s meaning, darted at him a
glance which might have been thought threatening; but d’Artagnan took no
heed of it.

“I disturb you, perhaps, my dear Aramis,” continued d’Artagnan, “for by
what I see, I am led to believe that you are confessing to these
gentlemen.”

Aramis colored imperceptibly. “You disturb me? Oh, quite the contrary,
dear friend, I swear; and as a proof of what I say, permit me to declare
I am rejoiced to see you safe and sound.”

“Ah, he’ll come round,” thought d’Artagnan; “that’s not bad!”

“This gentleman, who is my friend, has just escaped from a serious
danger,” continued Aramis, with unction, pointing to d’Artagnan with his
hand, and addressing the two ecclesiastics.

“Praise God, monsieur,” replied they, bowing together.

“I have not failed to do so, your Reverences,” replied the young man,
returning their salutation.

“You arrive in good time, dear d’Artagnan,” said Aramis, “and by taking
part in our discussion may assist us with your intelligence. Monsieur
the Principal of Amiens, Monsieur the Curate of Montdidier, and I are
arguing certain theological questions in which we have been much
interested; I shall be delighted to have your opinion.”

“The opinion of a swordsman can have very little weight,” replied
d’Artagnan, who began to be uneasy at the turn things were taking, “and
you had better be satisfied, believe me, with the knowledge of these
gentlemen.”

The two men in black bowed in their turn.

“On the contrary,” replied Aramis, “your opinion will be very valuable.
The question is this: Monsieur the Principal thinks that my thesis ought
to be dogmatic and didactic.”

“Your thesis! Are you then making a thesis?”

“Without doubt,” replied the Jesuit. “In the examination which precedes
ordination, a thesis is always a requisite.”

“Ordination!” cried d’Artagnan, who could not believe what the hostess
and Bazin had successively told him; and he gazed, half stupefied, upon
the three persons before him.

“Now,” continued Aramis, taking the same graceful position in his easy
chair that he would have assumed in bed, and complacently examining his
hand, which was as white and plump as that of a woman, and which he held
in the air to cause the blood to descend, “now, as you have heard,
d’Artagnan, Monsieur the Principal is desirous that my thesis should be
dogmatic, while I, for my part, would rather it should be ideal. This is
the reason why Monsieur the Principal has proposed to me the following
subject, which has not yet been treated upon, and in which I perceive
there is matter for magnificent elaboration-’UTRAQUE MANUS IN
BENEDICENDO CLERICIS INFERIORIBUS NECESSARIA EST.’”

D’Artagnan, whose erudition we are well acquainted with, evinced no more
interest on hearing this quotation than he had at that of M. de Treville
in allusion to the gifts he pretended that d’Artagnan had received from
the Duke of Buckingham.

“Which means,” resumed Aramis, that he might perfectly understand, “‘The
two hands are indispensable for priests of the inferior orders, when
they bestow the benediction.’”

“An admirable subject!” cried the Jesuit.

“Admirable and dogmatic!” repeated the curate, who, about as strong as
d’Artagnan with respect to Latin, carefully watched the Jesuit in order
to keep step with him, and repeated his words like an echo.

As to d’Artagnan, he remained perfectly insensible to the enthusiasm of
the two men in black.

“Yes, admirable! PRORSUS ADMIRABILE!” continued Aramis; “but which
requires a profound study of both the Scriptures and the Fathers. Now, I
have confessed to these learned ecclesiastics, and that in all humility,
that the duties of mounting guard and the service of the king have
caused me to neglect study a little. I should find myself, therefore,
more at my ease, FACILUS NATANS, in a subject of my own choice, which
would be to these hard theological questions what morals are to
metaphysics in philosophy.”

D’Artagnan began to be tired, and so did the curate.

“See what an exordium!” cried the Jesuit.

“Exordium,” repeated the curate, for the sake of saying something.
“QUEMADMODUM INTER COELORUM IMMNSITATEM.”

Aramis cast a glance upon d’Artagnan to see what effect all this
produced, and found his friend gaping enough to split his jaws.

“Let us speak French, my father,” said he to the Jesuit; “Monsieur
d’Artagnan will enjoy our conversation better.”

“Yes,” replied d’Artagnan; “I am fatigued with reading, and all this
Latin confuses me.”

“Certainly,” replied the Jesuit, a little put out, while the curate,
greatly delighted, turned upon d’Artagnan a look full of gratitude.
“Well, let us see what is to be derived from this gloss. Moses, the
servant of God-he was but a servant, please to understand-Moses blessed
with the hands; he held out both his arms while the Hebrews beat their
enemies, and then he blessed them with his two hands. Besides, what does
the Gospel say? IMPONITE MANUS, and not MANUM-place the HANDS, not the
HAND.”

“Place the HANDS,” repeated the curate, with a gesture.

“St. Peter, on the contrary, of whom the Popes are the successors,”
continued the Jesuit; “PORRIGE DIGITOS-present the fingers. Are you
there, now?”

“CERTES,” replied Aramis, in a pleased tone, “but the thing is subtle.”

“The FINGERS,” resumed the Jesuit, “St. Peter blessed with the FINGERS.
The Pope, therefore blesses with the fingers. And with how many fingers
does he bless? With THREE fingers, to be sure-one for the Father, one
for the Son, and one for the Holy Ghost.”

All crossed themselves. D’Artagnan thought it was proper to follow this
example.

“The Pope is the successor of St. Peter, and represents the three divine
powers; the rest-ORDINES INFERIORES-of the ecclesiastical hierarchy
bless in the name of the holy archangels and angels. The most humble
clerks such as our deacons and sacristans, bless with holy water
sprinklers, which resemble an infinite number of blessing fingers. There
is the subject simplified. ARGUMENTUM OMNI DENUDATUM ORNAMENTO. I could
make of that subject two volumes the size of this,” continued the
Jesuit; and in his enthusiasm he struck a St. Chrysostom in folio, which
made the table bend beneath its weight.

D’Artagnan trembled.

“CERTES,” said Aramis, “I do justice to the beauties of this thesis; but
at the same time I perceive it would be overwhelming for me. I had
chosen this text-tell me, dear d’Artagnan, if it is not to your
taste-’NON INUTILE EST DESIDERIUM IN OBLATIONE’; that is, ‘A little
regret is not unsuitable in an offering to the Lord.’”

“Stop there!” cried the Jesuit, “for that thesis touches closely upon
heresy. There is a proposition almost like it in the AUGUSTINUS of the
heresiarch Jansenius, whose book will sooner or later be burned by the
hands of the executioner. Take care, my young friend. You are inclining
toward false doctrines, my young friend; you will be lost.”

“You will be lost,” said the curate, shaking his head sorrowfully.

“You approach that famous point of free will which is a mortal rock. You
face the insinuations of the Pelagians and the semi-Pelagians.”

“But, my Reverend-” replied Aramis, a little amazed by the shower of
arguments that poured upon his head.

“How will you prove,” continued the Jesuit, without allowing him time to
speak, “that we ought to regret the world when we offer ourselves to
God? Listen to this dilemma: God is God, and the world is the devil. To
regret the world is to regret the devil; that is my conclusion.”

“And that is mine also,” said the curate.

“But, for heaven’s sake-” resumed Aramis.

“DESIDERAS DIABOLUM, unhappy man!” cried the Jesuit.

“He regrets the devil! Ah, my young friend,” added the curate, groaning,
“do not regret the devil, I implore you!”

D’Artagnan felt himself bewildered. It seemed to him as though he were
in a madhouse, and was becoming as mad as those he saw. He was, however,
forced to hold his tongue from not comprehending half the language they
employed.

“But listen to me, then,” resumed Aramis with politeness mingled with a
little impatience. “I do not say I regret; no, I will never pronounce
that sentence, which would not be orthodox.”

The Jesuit raised his hands toward heaven, and the curate did the same.

“No; but pray grant me that it is acting with an ill grace to offer to
the Lord only that with which we are perfectly disgusted! Don’t you
think so, d’Artagnan?”

“I think so, indeed,” cried he.

The Jesuit and the curate quite started from their chairs.

“This is the point of departure; it is a syllogism. The world is not
wanting in attractions. I quit the world; then I make a sacrifice. Now,
the Scripture says positively, ‘Make a sacrifice unto the Lord.’”

“That is true,” said his antagonists.

“And then,” said Aramis, pinching his ear to make it red, as he rubbed
his hands to make them white, “and then I made a certain RONDEAU upon it
last year, which I showed to Monsieur Voiture, and that great man paid
me a thousand compliments.”

“A RONDEAU!” said the Jesuit, disdainfully.

“A RONDEAU!” said the curate, mechanically.

“Repeat it! Repeat it!” cried d’Artagnan; “it will make a little
change.”

“Not so, for it is religious,” replied Aramis; “it is theology in
verse.”

“The devil!” said d’Artagnan.

“Here it is,” said Aramis, with a little look of diffidence, which,
however, was not exempt from a shade of hypocrisy:

“Vous qui pleurez un passe plein de charmes, Et qui trainez des jours
infortunes, Tous vos malheurs se verront termines, Quand a Dieu seul
vous offrirez vos larmes, Vous qui pleurez!”

“You who weep for pleasures fled, While dragging on a life of care, All
your woes will melt in air, If to God your tears are shed, You who
weep!”

d’Artagnan and the curate appeared pleased. The Jesuit persisted in his
opinion. “Beware of a profane taste in your theological style. What says
Augustine on this subject: ‘SEVERUS SIT CLERICORUM VERBO.’”

“Yes, let the sermon be clear,” said the curate.

“Now,” hastily interrupted the Jesuit, on seeing that his acolyte was
going astray, “now your thesis would please the ladies; it would have
the success of one of Monsieur Patru’s pleadings.”

“Please God!” cried Aramis, transported.

“There it is,” cried the Jesuit; “the world still speaks within you in a
loud voice, ALTISIMM VOCE. You follow the world, my young friend, and I
tremble lest grace prove not efficacious.”

“Be satisfied, my reverend father, I can answer for myself.”

“Mundane presumption!”

“I know myself, Father; my resolution is irrevocable.”

“Then you persist in continuing that thesis?”

“I feel myself called upon to treat that, and no other. I will see about
the continuation of it, and tomorrow I hope you will be satisfied with
the corrections I shall have made in consequence of your advice.”

“Work slowly,” said the curate; “we leave you in an excellent tone of
mind.”

“Yes, the ground is all sown,” said the Jesuit, “and we have not to fear
that one portion of the seed may have fallen upon stone, another upon
the highway, or that the birds of heaven have eaten the rest, AVES COELI
COMEDERUNT ILLAM.”

“Plague stifle you and your Latin!” said d’Artagnan, who began to feel
all his patience exhausted.

“Farewell, my son,” said the curate, “till tomorrow.”

“Till tomorrow, rash youth,” said the Jesuit. “You promise to become one
of the lights of the Church. Heaven grant that this light prove not a
devouring fire!”

D’Artagnan, who for an hour past had been gnawing his nails with
impatience, was beginning to attack the quick.

The two men in black rose, bowed to Aramis and d’Artagnan, and advanced
toward the door. Bazin, who had been standing listening to all this
controversy with a pious jubilation, sprang toward them, took the
breviary of the curate and the missal of the Jesuit, and walked
respectfully before them to clear their way.

Aramis conducted them to the foot of the stairs, and then immediately
came up again to d’Artagnan, whose senses were still in a state of
confusion.

When left alone, the two friends at first kept an embarrassed silence.
It however became necessary for one of them to break it first, and as
d’Artagnan appeared determined to leave that honor to his companion,
Aramis said, “you see that I am returned to my fundamental ideas.”

“Yes, efficacious grace has touched you, as that gentleman said just
now.”

“Oh, these plans of retreat have been formed for a long time. You have
often heard me speak of them, have you not, my friend?”

“Yes; but I confess I always thought you jested.”

“With such things! Oh, d’Artagnan!”

“The devil! Why, people jest with death.”

“And people are wrong, d’Artagnan; for death is the door which leads to
perdition or to salvation.”

“Granted; but if you please, let us not theologize, Aramis. You must
have had enough for today. As for me, I have almost forgotten the little
Latin I have ever known. Then I confess to you that I have eaten nothing
since ten o’clock this morning, and I am devilish hungry.”

“We will dine directly, my friend; only you must please to remember that
this is Friday. Now, on such a day I can neither eat flesh nor see it
eaten. If you can be satisfied with my dinner-it consists of cooked
tetragones and fruits.”

“What do you mean by tetragones?” asked d’Artagnan, uneasily.

“I mean spinach,” replied Aramis; “but on your account I will add some
eggs, and that is a serious infraction of the rule-for eggs are meat,
since they engender chickens.”

“This feast is not very succulent; but never mind, I will put up with it
for the sake of remaining with you.”

“I am grateful to you for the sacrifice,” said Aramis; “but if your body
be not greatly benefited by it, be assured your soul will.”

“And so, Aramis, you are decidedly going into the Church? What will our
two friends say? What will Monsieur de Treville say? They will treat you
as a deserter, I warn you.”

“I do not enter the Church; I re-enter it. I deserted the Church for the
world, for you know that I forced myself when I became a Musketeer.”

“I? I know nothing about it.”

“You don’t know I quit the seminary?”

“Not at all.”

“This is my story, then. Besides, the Scriptures say, ‘Confess
yourselves to one another,’ and I confess to you, d’Artagnan.”

“And I give you absolution beforehand. You see I am a good sort of a
man.”

“Do not jest about holy things, my friend.”

“Go on, then, I listen.”

“I had been at the seminary from nine years old; in three days I should
have been twenty. I was about to become an abbe, and all was arranged.
One evening I went, according to custom, to a house which I frequented
with much pleasure: when one is young, what can be expected?--one is
weak. An officer who saw me, with a jealous eye, reading the LIVES OF
THE SAINTS to the mistress of the house, entered suddenly and without
being announced. That evening I had translated an episode of Judith, and
had just communicated my verses to the lady, who gave me all sorts of
compliments, and leaning on my shoulder, was reading them a second time
with me. Her pose, which I must admit was rather free, wounded this
officer. He said nothing; but when I went out he followed, and quickly
came up with me. ‘Monsieur the Abbe,’ said he, ‘do you like blows with a
cane?’ ‘I cannot say, monsieur,’ answered I; ‘no one has ever dared to
give me any.’ ‘Well, listen to me, then, Monsieur the Abbe! If you
venture again into the house in which I have met you this evening, I
will dare it myself.’ I really think I must have been frightened. I
became very pale; I felt my legs fail me; I sought for a reply, but
could find none-I was silent. The officer waited for his reply, and
seeing it so long coming, he burst into a laugh, turned upon his heel,
and re-entered the house. I returned to the seminary.

“I am a gentleman born, and my blood is warm, as you may have remarked,
my dear d’Artagnan. The insult was terrible, and although unknown to the
rest of the world, I felt it live and fester at the bottom of my heart.
I informed my superiors that I did not feel myself sufficiently prepared
for ordination, and at my request the ceremony was postponed for a year.
I sought out the best fencing master in Paris, I made an agreement with
him to take a lesson every day, and every day for a year I took that
lesson. Then, on the anniversary of the day on which I had been
insulted, I hung my cassock on a peg, assumed the costume of a cavalier,
and went to a ball given by a lady friend of mine and to which I knew my
man was invited. It was in the Rue des France-Bourgeois, close to La
Force. As I expected, my officer was there. I went up to him as he was
singing a love ditty and looking tenderly at a lady, and interrupted him
exactly in the middle of the second couplet. ‘Monsieur,’ said I, ‘does
it still displease you that I should frequent a certain house of La Rue
Payenne? And would you still cane me if I took it into my head to
disobey you? The officer looked at me with astonishment, and then said,
‘What is your business with me, monsieur? I do not know you.’ ‘I am,’
said I, ‘the little abbe who reads LIVES OF THE SAINTS, and translates
Judith into verse.’ ‘Ah, ah! I recollect now,’ said the officer, in a
jeering tone; ‘well, what do you want with me?’ ‘I want you to spare
time to take a walk with me.’ ‘Tomorrow morning, if you like, with the
greatest pleasure.’ ‘No, not tomorrow morning, if you please, but
immediately.’ ‘If you absolutely insist.’ ‘I do insist upon it.’ ‘Come,
then. Ladies,’ said the officer, ‘do not disturb yourselves; allow me
time just to kill this gentleman, and I will return and finish the last
couplet.’

“We went out. I took him to the Rue Payenne, to exactly the same spot
where, a year before, at the very same hour, he had paid me the
compliment I have related to you. It was a superb moonlight night. We
immediately drew, and at the first pass I laid him stark dead.”

“The devil!” cried d’Artagnan.

“Now,” continued Aramis, “as the ladies did not see the singer come
back, and as he was found in the Rue Payenne with a great sword wound
through his body, it was supposed that I had accommodated him thus; and
the matter created some scandal which obliged me to renounce the cassock
for a time. Athos, whose acquaintance I made about that period, and
Porthos, who had in addition to my lessons taught me some effective
tricks of fence, prevailed upon me to solicit the uniform of a
Musketeer. The king entertained great regard for my father, who had
fallen at the siege of Arras, and the uniform was granted. You may
understand that the moment has come for me to re-enter the bosom of the
Church.”

“And why today, rather than yesterday or tomorrow? What has happened to
you today, to raise all these melancholy ideas?”

“This wound, my dear d’Artagnan, has been a warning to me from heaven.”

“This wound? Bah, it is now nearly healed, and I am sure it is not that
which gives you the most pain.”

“What, then?” said Aramis, blushing.

“You have one at heart, Aramis, one deeper and more painful--a wound
made by a woman.”

The eye of Aramis kindled in spite of himself.

“Ah,” said he, dissembling his emotion under a feigned carelessness, “do
not talk of such things, and suffer love pains? VANITAS VANITATUM!
According to your idea, then, my brain is turned. And for whom-for some
GRISETTE, some chambermaid with whom I have trifled in some garrison?
Fie!”

“Pardon, my dear Aramis, but I thought you carried your eyes higher.”

“Higher? And who am I, to nourish such ambition? A poor Musketeer, a
beggar, an unknown--who hates slavery, and finds himself ill-placed in
the world.”

“Aramis, Aramis!” cried d’Artagnan, looking at his friend with an air of
doubt.

“Dust I am, and to dust I return. Life is full of humiliations and
sorrows,” continued he, becoming still more melancholy; “all the ties
which attach him to life break in the hand of man, particularly the
golden ties. Oh, my dear d’Artagnan,” resumed Aramis, giving to his
voice a slight tone of bitterness, “trust me! Conceal your wounds when
you have any; silence is the last joy of the unhappy. Beware of giving
anyone the clue to your griefs; the curious suck our tears as flies suck
the blood of a wounded hart.”

“Alas, my dear Aramis,” said d’Artagnan, in his turn heaving a profound
sigh, “that is my story you are relating!”

“How?”

“Yes; a woman whom I love, whom I adore, has just been torn from me by
force. I do not know where she is or whither they have conducted her.
She is perhaps a prisoner; she is perhaps dead!”

“Yes, but you have at least this consolation, that you can say to
yourself she has not quit you voluntarily, that if you learn no news of
her, it is because all communication with you is interdicted; while I--”

“Well?”

“Nothing,” replied Aramis, “nothing.”

“So you renounce the world, then, forever; that is a settled thing--a
resolution registered!”

“Forever! You are my friend today; tomorrow you will be no more to me
than a shadow, or rather, even, you will no longer exist. As for the
world, it is a sepulcher and nothing else.”

“The devil! All this is very sad which you tell me.”

“What will you? My vocation commands me; it carries me away.”

D’Artagnan smiled, but made no answer.

Aramis continued, “And yet, while I do belong to the earth, I wish to
speak of you--of our friends.”

“And on my part,” said d’Artagnan, “I wished to speak of you, but I find
you so completely detached from everything! To love you cry, ‘Fie!
Friends are shadows! The world is a sepulcher!’”

“Alas, you will find it so yourself,” said Aramis, with a sigh.

“Well, then, let us say no more about it,” said d’Artagnan; “and let us
burn this letter, which, no doubt, announces to you some fresh
infidelity of your GRISETTE or your chambermaid.”

“What letter?” cried Aramis, eagerly.

“A letter which was sent to your abode in your absence, and which was
given to me for you.”

“But from whom is that letter?”

“Oh, from some heartbroken waiting woman, some desponding GRISETTE; from
Madame de Chevreuse’s chambermaid, perhaps, who was obliged to return to
Tours with her mistress, and who, in order to appear smart and
attractive, stole some perfumed paper, and sealed her letter with a
duchess’s coronet.”

“What do you say?”

“Hold! I must have lost it,” said the young man maliciously, pretending
to search for it. “But fortunately the world is a sepulcher; the men,
and consequently the women, are but shadows, and love is a sentiment to
which you cry, ‘Fie! Fie!’”

“d’Artagnan, d’Artagnan,” cried Aramis, “you are killing me!”

“Well, here it is at last!” said d’Artagnan, as he drew the letter from
his pocket.

Aramis made a bound, seized the letter, read it, or rather devoured it,
his countenance radiant.

“This same waiting maid seems to have an agreeable style,” said the
messenger, carelessly.

“Thanks, d’Artagnan, thanks!” cried Aramis, almost in a state of
delirium. “She was forced to return to Tours; she is not faithless; she
still loves me! Come, my friend, come, let me embrace you. Happiness
almost stifles me!”

The two friends began to dance around the venerable St. Chrysostom,
kicking about famously the sheets of the thesis, which had fallen on the
floor.

At that moment Bazin entered with the spinach and the omelet.

“Be off, you wretch!” cried Aramis, throwing his skullcap in his face.
“Return whence you came; take back those horrible vegetables, and that
poor kickshaw! Order a larded hare, a fat capon, mutton leg dressed with
garlic, and four bottles of old Burgundy.”

Bazin, who looked at his master, without comprehending the cause of this
change, in a melancholy manner, allowed the omelet to slip into the
spinach, and the spinach onto the floor.

“Now this is the moment to consecrate your existence to the King of
kings,” said d’Artagnan, “if you persist in offering him a civility. NON
INUTILE DESIDERIUM OBLATIONE.”

“Go to the devil with your Latin. Let us drink, my dear d’Artagnan,
MORBLEU! Let us drink while the wine is fresh! Let us drink heartily,
and while we do so, tell me a little of what is going on in the world
yonder.”




27 THE WIFE OF ATHOS


We have now to search for Athos,” said d’Artagnan to the vivacious
Aramis, when he had informed him of all that had passed since their
departure from the capital, and an excellent dinner had made one of them
forget his thesis and the other his fatigue.

“Do you think, then, that any harm can have happened to him?” asked
Aramis. “Athos is so cool, so brave, and handles his sword so
skillfully.”

“No doubt. Nobody has a higher opinion of the courage and skill of Athos
than I have; but I like better to hear my sword clang against lances
than against staves. I fear lest Athos should have been beaten down by
serving men. Those fellows strike hard, and don’t leave off in a hurry.
This is why I wish to set out again as soon as possible.”

“I will try to accompany you,” said Aramis, “though I scarcely feel in a
condition to mount on horseback. Yesterday I undertook to employ that
cord which you see hanging against the wall, but pain prevented my
continuing the pious exercise.”

“That’s the first time I ever heard of anybody trying to cure gunshot
wounds with cat-o’-nine-tails; but you were ill, and illness renders the
head weak, therefore you may be excused.”

“When do you mean to set out?”

“Tomorrow at daybreak. Sleep as soundly as you can tonight, and
tomorrow, if you can, we will take our departure together.”

“Till tomorrow, then,” said Aramis; “for iron-nerved as you are, you
must need repose.”

The next morning, when d’Artagnan entered Aramis’s chamber, he found him
at the window.

“What are you looking at?” asked d’Artagnan.

“My faith! I am admiring three magnificent horses which the stable boys
are leading about. It would be a pleasure worthy of a prince to travel
upon such horses.”

“Well, my dear Aramis, you may enjoy that pleasure, for one of those
three horses is yours.”

“Ah, bah! Which?”

“Whichever of the three you like, I have no preference.”

“And the rich caparison, is that mine, too?”

“Without doubt.”

“You laugh, d’Artagnan.”

“No, I have left off laughing, now that you speak French.”

“What, those rich holsters, that velvet housing, that saddle studded
with silver-are they all for me?”

“For you and nobody else, as the horse which paws the ground is mine,
and the other horse, which is caracoling, belongs to Athos.”

“PESTE! They are three superb animals!”

“I am glad they please you.”

“Why, it must have been the king who made you such a present.”

“Certainly it was not the cardinal; but don’t trouble yourself whence
they come, think only that one of the three is your property.”

“I choose that which the red-headed boy is leading.”

“It is yours!”

“Good heaven! That is enough to drive away all my pains; I could mount
him with thirty balls in my body. On my soul, handsome stirrups! HOLA,
Bazin, come here this minute.”

Bazin appeared on the threshold, dull and spiritless.

“That last order is useless,” interrupted d’Artagnan; “there are loaded
pistols in your holsters.”

Bazin sighed.

“Come, Monsieur Bazin, make yourself easy,” said d’Artagnan; “people of
all conditions gain the kingdom of heaven.”

“Monsieur was already such a good theologian,” said Bazin, almost
weeping; “he might have become a bishop, and perhaps a cardinal.”

“Well, but my poor Bazin, reflect a little. Of what use is it to be a
churchman, pray? You do not avoid going to war by that means; you see,
the cardinal is about to make the next campaign, helm on head and
partisan in hand. And Monsieur de Nogaret de la Valette, what do you say
of him? He is a cardinal likewise. Ask his lackey how often he has had
to prepare lint of him.”

“Alas!” sighed Bazin. “I know it, monsieur; everything is turned
topsy-turvy in the world nowadays.”

While this dialogue was going on, the two young men and the poor lackey
descended.

“Hold my stirrup, Bazin,” cried Aramis; and Aramis sprang into the
saddle with his usual grace and agility, but after a few vaults and
curvets of the noble animal his rider felt his pains come on so
insupportably that he turned pale and became unsteady in his seat.
D’Artagnan, who, foreseeing such an event, had kept his eye on him,
sprang toward him, caught him in his arms, and assisted him to his
chamber.

“That’s all right, my dear Aramis, take care of yourself,” said he; “I
will go alone in search of Athos.”

“You are a man of brass,” replied Aramis.

“No, I have good luck, that is all. But how do you mean to pass your
time till I come back? No more theses, no more glosses upon the fingers
or upon benedictions, hey?”

Aramis smiled. “I will make verses,” said he.

“Yes, I dare say; verses perfumed with the odor of the billet from the
attendant of Madame de Chevreuse. Teach Bazin prosody; that will console
him. As to the horse, ride him a little every day, and that will
accustom you to his maneuvers.”

“Oh, make yourself easy on that head,” replied Aramis. “You will find me
ready to follow you.”

They took leave of each other, and in ten minutes, after having
commended his friend to the cares of the hostess and Bazin, d’Artagnan
was trotting along in the direction of Amiens.

How was he going to find Athos? Should he find him at all? The position
in which he had left him was critical. He probably had succumbed. This
idea, while darkening his brow, drew several sighs from him, and caused
him to formulate to himself a few vows of vengeance. Of all his friends,
Athos was the eldest, and the least resembling him in appearance, in his
tastes and sympathies.

Yet he entertained a marked preference for this gentleman. The noble and
distinguished air of Athos, those flashes of greatness which from time
to time broke out from the shade in which he voluntarily kept himself,
that unalterable equality of temper which made him the most pleasant
companion in the world, that forced and cynical gaiety, that bravery
which might have been termed blind if it had not been the result of the
rarest coolness--such qualities attracted more than the esteem, more
than the friendship of d’Artagnan; they attracted his admiration.

Indeed, when placed beside M. de Treville, the elegant and noble
courtier, Athos in his most cheerful days might advantageously sustain a
comparison. He was of middle height; but his person was so admirably
shaped and so well proportioned that more than once in his struggles
with Porthos he had overcome the giant whose physical strength was
proverbial among the Musketeers. His head, with piercing eyes, a
straight nose, a chin cut like that of Brutus, had altogether an
indefinable character of grandeur and grace. His hands, of which he took
little care, were the despair of Aramis, who cultivated his with almond
paste and perfumed oil. The sound of his voice was at once penetrating
and melodious; and then, that which was inconceivable in Athos, who was
always retiring, was that delicate knowledge of the world and of the
usages of the most brilliant society--those manners of a high degree
which appeared, as if unconsciously to himself, in his least actions.

If a repast were on foot, Athos presided over it better than any other,
placing every guest exactly in the rank which his ancestors had earned
for him or that he had made for himself. If a question in heraldry were
started, Athos knew all the noble families of the kingdom, their
genealogy, their alliances, their coats of arms, and the origin of them.
Etiquette had no minutiae unknown to him. He knew what were the rights
of the great land owners. He was profoundly versed in hunting and
falconry, and had one day when conversing on this great art astonished
even Louis XIII himself, who took a pride in being considered a past
master therein.

Like all the great nobles of that period, Athos rode and fenced to
perfection. But still further, his education had been so little
neglected, even with respect to scholastic studies, so rare at this time
among gentlemen, that he smiled at the scraps of Latin which Aramis
sported and which Porthos pretended to understand. Two or three times,
even, to the great astonishment of his friends, he had, when Aramis
allowed some rudimental error to escape him, replaced a verb in its
right tense and a noun in its case. Besides, his probity was
irreproachable, in an age in which soldiers compromised so easily with
their religion and their consciences, lovers with the rigorous delicacy
of our era, and the poor with God’s Seventh Commandment. This Athos,
then, was a very extraordinary man.

And yet this nature so distinguished, this creature so beautiful, this
essence so fine, was seen to turn insensibly toward material life, as
old men turn toward physical and moral imbecility. Athos, in his hours
of gloom--and these hours were frequent--was extinguished as to the
whole of the luminous portion of him, and his brilliant side disappeared
as into profound darkness.

Then the demigod vanished; he remained scarcely a man. His head hanging
down, his eye dull, his speech slow and painful, Athos would look for
hours together at his bottle, his glass, or at Grimaud, who, accustomed
to obey him by signs, read in the faint glance of his master his least
desire, and satisfied it immediately. If the four friends were assembled
at one of these moments, a word, thrown forth occasionally with a
violent effort, was the share Athos furnished to the conversation. In
exchange for his silence Athos drank enough for four, and without
appearing to be otherwise affected by wine than by a more marked
constriction of the brow and by a deeper sadness.

D’Artagnan, whose inquiring disposition we are acquainted with, had
not--whatever interest he had in satisfying his curiosity on this
subject--been able to assign any cause for these fits, or for the
periods of their recurrence. Athos never received any letters; Athos
never had concerns which all his friends did not know.

It could not be said that it was wine which produced this sadness; for
in truth he only drank to combat this sadness, which wine however, as we
have said, rendered still darker. This excess of bilious humor could not
be attributed to play; for unlike Porthos, who accompanied the
variations of chance with songs or oaths, Athos when he won remained as
unmoved as when he lost. He had been known, in the circle of the
Musketeers, to win in one night three thousand pistoles; to lose them
even to the gold-embroidered belt for gala days, win all this again with
the addition of a hundred louis, without his beautiful eyebrow being
heightened or lowered half a line, without his hands losing their pearly
hue, without his conversation, which was cheerful that evening, ceasing
to be calm and agreeable.

Neither was it, as with our neighbors, the English, an atmospheric
influence which darkened his countenance; for the sadness generally
became more intense toward the fine season of the year. June and July
were the terrible months with Athos.

For the present he had no anxiety. He shrugged his shoulders when people
spoke of the future. His secret, then, was in the past, as had often
been vaguely said to d’Artagnan.

This mysterious shade, spread over his whole person, rendered still more
interesting the man whose eyes or mouth, even in the most complete
intoxication, had never revealed anything, however skillfully questions
had been put to him.

“Well,” thought d’Artagnan, “poor Athos is perhaps at this moment dead,
and dead by my fault--for it was I who dragged him into this affair, of
which he did not know the origin, of which he is ignorant of the result,
and from which he can derive no advantage.”

“Without reckoning, monsieur,” added Planchet to his master’s audibly
expressed reflections, “that we perhaps owe our lives to him. Do you
remember how he cried, ‘On, d’Artagnan, on, I am taken’? And when he had
discharged his two pistols, what a terrible noise he made with his
sword! One might have said that twenty men, or rather twenty mad devils,
were fighting.”

These words redoubled the eagerness of d’Artagnan, who urged his horse,
though he stood in need of no incitement, and they proceeded at a rapid
pace. About eleven o’clock in the morning they perceived Amiens, and at
half past eleven they were at the door of the cursed inn.

D’Artagnan had often meditated against the perfidious host one of those
hearty vengeances which offer consolation while they are hoped for. He
entered the hostelry with his hat pulled over his eyes, his left hand on
the pommel of the sword, and cracking his whip with his right hand.

“Do you remember me?” said he to the host, who advanced to greet him.

“I have not that honor, monseigneur,” replied the latter, his eyes
dazzled by the brilliant style in which d’Artagnan traveled.

“What, you don’t know me?”

“No, monseigneur.”

“Well, two words will refresh your memory. What have you done with that
gentleman against whom you had the audacity, about twelve days ago, to
make an accusation of passing false money?”

The host became as pale as death; for d’Artagnan had assumed a
threatening attitude, and Planchet modeled himself after his master.

“Ah, monseigneur, do not mention it!” cried the host, in the most
pitiable voice imaginable. “Ah, monseigneur, how dearly have I paid for
that fault, unhappy wretch as I am!”

“That gentleman, I say, what has become of him?”

“Deign to listen to me, monseigneur, and be merciful! Sit down, in
mercy!”

D’Artagnan, mute with anger and anxiety, took a seat in the threatening
attitude of a judge. Planchet glared fiercely over the back of his
armchair.

“Here is the story, monseigneur,” resumed the trembling host; “for I now
recollect you. It was you who rode off at the moment I had that
unfortunate difference with the gentleman you speak of.”

“Yes, it was I; so you may plainly perceive that you have no mercy to
expect if you do not tell me the whole truth.”

“Condescend to listen to me, and you shall know all.”

“I listen.”

“I had been warned by the authorities that a celebrated coiner of bad
money would arrive at my inn, with several of his companions, all
disguised as Guards or Musketeers. Monseigneur, I was furnished with a
description of your horses, your lackeys, your countenances--nothing was
omitted.”

“Go on, go on!” said d’Artagnan, who quickly understood whence such an
exact description had come.

“I took then, in conformity with the orders of the authorities, who sent
me a reinforcement of six men, such measures as I thought necessary to
get possession of the persons of the pretended coiners.”

“Again!” said d’Artagnan, whose ears chafed terribly under the
repetition of this word COINERs.

“Pardon me, monseigneur, for saying such things, but they form my
excuse. The authorities had terrified me, and you know that an innkeeper
must keep on good terms with the authorities.”

“But once again, that gentleman--where is he? What has become of him? Is
he dead? Is he living?”

“Patience, monseigneur, we are coming to it. There happened then that
which you know, and of which your precipitate departure,” added the
host, with an acuteness that did not escape d’Artagnan, “appeared to
authorize the issue. That gentleman, your friend, defended himself
desperately. His lackey, who, by an unforeseen piece of ill luck, had
quarreled with the officers, disguised as stable lads--”

“Miserable scoundrel!” cried d’Artagnan, “you were all in the plot,
then! And I really don’t know what prevents me from exterminating you
all.”

“Alas, monseigneur, we were not in the plot, as you will soon see.
Monsieur your friend (pardon for not calling him by the honorable name
which no doubt he bears, but we do not know that name), Monsieur your
friend, having disabled two men with his pistols, retreated fighting
with his sword, with which he disabled one of my men, and stunned me
with a blow of the flat side of it.”

“You villain, will you finish?” cried d’Artagnan, “Athos--what has
become of Athos?”

“While fighting and retreating, as I have told Monseigneur, he found the
door of the cellar stairs behind him, and as the door was open, he took
out the key, and barricaded himself inside. As we were sure of finding
him there, we left him alone.”

“Yes,” said d’Artagnan, “you did not really wish to kill; you only
wished to imprison him.”

“Good God! To imprison him, monseigneur? Why, he imprisoned himself, I
swear to you he did. In the first place he had made rough work of it;
one man was killed on the spot, and two others were severely wounded.
The dead man and the two wounded were carried off by their comrades, and
I have heard nothing of either of them since. As for myself, as soon as
I recovered my senses I went to Monsieur the Governor, to whom I related
all that had passed, and asked, what I should do with my prisoner.
Monsieur the Governor was all astonishment. He told me he knew nothing
about the matter, that the orders I had received did not come from him,
and that if I had the audacity to mention his name as being concerned in
this disturbance he would have me hanged. It appears that I had made a
mistake, monsieur, that I had arrested the wrong person, and that he
whom I ought to have arrested had escaped.”

“But Athos!” cried d’Artagnan, whose impatience was increased by the
disregard of the authorities, “Athos, where is he?”

“As I was anxious to repair the wrongs I had done the prisoner,” resumed
the innkeeper, “I took my way straight to the cellar in order to set him
at liberty. Ah, monsieur, he was no longer a man, he was a devil! To my
offer of liberty, he replied that it was nothing but a snare, and that
before he came out he intended to impose his own conditions. I told him
very humbly--for I could not conceal from myself the scrape I had got
into by laying hands on one of his Majesty’s Musketeers--I told him I
was quite ready to submit to his conditions.

“‘In the first place,’ said he, ‘I wish my lackey placed with me, fully
armed.’ We hastened to obey this order; for you will please to
understand, monsieur, we were disposed to do everything your friend
could desire. Monsieur Grimaud (he told us his name, although he does
not talk much)--Monsieur Grimaud, then, went down to the cellar, wounded
as he was; then his master, having admitted him, barricaded the door
afresh, and ordered us to remain quietly in our own bar.”

“But where is Athos now?” cried d’Artagnan. “Where is Athos?”

“In the cellar, monsieur.”

“What, you scoundrel! Have you kept him in the cellar all this time?”

“Merciful heaven! No, monsieur! We keep him in the cellar! You do not
know what he is about in the cellar. Ah! If you could but persuade him
to come out, monsieur, I should owe you the gratitude of my whole life;
I should adore you as my patron saint!”

“Then he is there? I shall find him there?”

“Without doubt you will, monsieur; he persists in remaining there. We
every day pass through the air hole some bread at the end of a fork, and
some meat when he asks for it; but alas! It is not of bread and meat of
which he makes the greatest consumption. I once endeavored to go down
with two of my servants; but he flew into terrible rage. I heard the
noise he made in loading his pistols, and his servant in loading his
musketoon. Then, when we asked them what were their intentions, the
master replied that he had forty charges to fire, and that he and his
lackey would fire to the last one before he would allow a single soul of
us to set foot in the cellar. Upon this I went and complained to the
governor, who replied that I only had what I deserved, and that it would
teach me to insult honorable gentlemen who took up their abode in my
house.”

“So that since that time--” replied d’Artagnan, totally unable to
refrain from laughing at the pitiable face of the host.

“So from that time, monsieur,” continued the latter, “we have led the
most miserable life imaginable; for you must know, monsieur, that all
our provisions are in the cellar. There is our wine in bottles, and our
wine in casks; the beer, the oil, and the spices, the bacon, and
sausages. And as we are prevented from going down there, we are forced
to refuse food and drink to the travelers who come to the house; so that
our hostelry is daily going to ruin. If your friend remains another week
in my cellar I shall be a ruined man.”

“And not more than justice, either, you ass! Could you not perceive by
our appearance that we were people of quality, and not coiners--say?”

“Yes, monsieur, you are right,” said the host. “But, hark, hark! There
he is!”

“Somebody has disturbed him, without doubt,” said d’Artagnan.

“But he must be disturbed,” cried the host; “Here are two English
gentlemen just arrived.”

“Well?”

“Well, the English like good wine, as you may know, monsieur; these have
asked for the best. My wife has perhaps requested permission of Monsieur
Athos to go into the cellar to satisfy these gentlemen; and he, as
usual, has refused. Ah, good heaven! There is the hullabaloo louder than
ever!”

D’Artagnan, in fact, heard a great noise on the side next the cellar. He
rose, and preceded by the host wringing his hands, and followed by
Planchet with his musketoon ready for use, he approached the scene of
action.

The two gentlemen were exasperated; they had had a long ride, and were
dying with hunger and thirst.

“But this is tyranny!” cried one of them, in very good French, though
with a foreign accent, “that this madman will not allow these good
people access to their own wine! Nonsense, let us break open the door,
and if he is too far gone in his madness, well, we will kill him!”

“Softly, gentlemen!” said d’Artagnan, drawing his pistols from his belt,
“you will kill nobody, if you please!”

“Good, good!” cried the calm voice of Athos, from the other side of the
door, “let them just come in, these devourers of little children, and we
shall see!”

Brave as they appeared to be, the two English gentlemen looked at each
other hesitatingly. One might have thought there was in that cellar one
of those famished ogres--the gigantic heroes of popular legends, into
whose cavern nobody could force their way with impunity.

There was a moment of silence; but at length the two Englishmen felt
ashamed to draw back, and the angrier one descended the five or six
steps which led to the cellar, and gave a kick against the door enough
to split a wall.

“Planchet,” said d’Artagnan, cocking his pistols, “I will take charge of
the one at the top; you look to the one below. Ah, gentlemen, you want
battle; and you shall have it.”

“Good God!” cried the hollow voice of Athos, “I can hear d’Artagnan, I
think.”

“Yes,” cried d’Artagnan, raising his voice in turn, “I am here, my
friend.”

“Ah, good, then,” replied Athos, “we will teach them, these door
breakers!”

The gentlemen had drawn their swords, but they found themselves taken
between two fires. They still hesitated an instant; but, as before,
pride prevailed, and a second kick split the door from bottom to top.

“Stand on one side, d’Artagnan, stand on one side,” cried Athos. “I am
going to fire!”

“Gentlemen,” exclaimed d’Artagnan, whom reflection never abandoned,
“gentlemen, think of what you are about. Patience, Athos! You are
running your heads into a very silly affair; you will be riddled. My
lackey and I will have three shots at you, and you will get as many from
the cellar. You will then have our swords, with which, I can assure you,
my friend and I can play tolerably well. Let me conduct your business
and my own. You shall soon have something to drink; I give you my word.”

“If there is any left,” grumbled the jeering voice of Athos.

The host felt a cold sweat creep down his back.

“How! ‘If there is any left!’” murmured he.

“What the devil! There must be plenty left,” replied d’Artagnan. “Be
satisfied of that; these two cannot have drunk all the cellar.
Gentlemen, return your swords to their scabbards.”

“Well, provided you replace your pistols in your belt.”

“Willingly.”

And d’Artagnan set the example. Then, turning toward Planchet, he made
him a sign to uncock his musketoon.

The Englishmen, convinced of these peaceful proceedings, sheathed their
swords grumblingly. The history of Athos’s imprisonment was then related
to them; and as they were really gentlemen, they pronounced the host in
the wrong.

“Now, gentlemen,” said d’Artagnan, “go up to your room again; and in ten
minutes, I will answer for it, you shall have all you desire.”

The Englishmen bowed and went upstairs.

“Now I am alone, my dear Athos,” said d’Artagnan; “open the door, I beg
of you.”

“Instantly,” said Athos.

Then was heard a great noise of fagots being removed and of the groaning
of posts; these were the counterscarps and bastions of Athos, which the
besieged himself demolished.

An instant after, the broken door was removed, and the pale face of
Athos appeared, who with a rapid glance took a survey of the
surroundings.

D’Artagnan threw himself on his neck and embraced him tenderly. He then
tried to draw him from his moist abode, but to his surprise he perceived
that Athos staggered.

“You are wounded,” said he.

“I! Not at all. I am dead drunk, that’s all, and never did a man more
strongly set about getting so. By the Lord, my good host! I must at
least have drunk for my part a hundred and fifty bottles.”

“Mercy!” cried the host, “if the lackey has drunk only half as much as
the master, I am a ruined man.”

“Grimaud is a well-bred lackey. He would never think of faring in the
same manner as his master; he only drank from the cask. Hark! I don’t
think he put the faucet in again. Do you hear it? It is running now.”

D’Artagnan burst into a laugh which changed the shiver of the host into
a burning fever.

In the meantime, Grimaud appeared in his turn behind his master, with
the musketoon on his shoulder, and his head shaking. Like one of those
drunken satyrs in the pictures of Rubens. He was moistened before and
behind with a greasy liquid which the host recognized as his best olive
oil.

The four crossed the public room and proceeded to take possession of the
best apartment in the house, which d’Artagnan occupied with authority.

In the meantime the host and his wife hurried down with lamps into the
cellar, which had so long been interdicted to them and where a frightful
spectacle awaited them.

Beyond the fortifications through which Athos had made a breach in order
to get out, and which were composed of fagots, planks, and empty casks,
heaped up according to all the rules of the strategic art, they found,
swimming in puddles of oil and wine, the bones and fragments of all the
hams they had eaten; while a heap of broken bottles filled the whole
left-hand corner of the cellar, and a tun, the cock of which was left
running, was yielding, by this means, the last drop of its blood. “The
image of devastation and death,” as the ancient poet says, “reigned as
over a field of battle.”

Of fifty large sausages, suspended from the joists, scarcely ten
remained.

Then the lamentations of the host and hostess pierced the vault of the
cellar. D’Artagnan himself was moved by them. Athos did not even turn
his head.

To grief succeeded rage. The host armed himself with a spit, and rushed
into the chamber occupied by the two friends.

“Some wine!” said Athos, on perceiving the host.

“Some wine!” cried the stupefied host, “some wine? Why you have drunk
more than a hundred pistoles’ worth! I am a ruined man, lost,
destroyed!”

“Bah,” said Athos, “we were always dry.”

“If you had been contented with drinking, well and good; but you have
broken all the bottles.”

“You pushed me upon a heap which rolled down. That was your fault.”

“All my oil is lost!”

“Oil is a sovereign balm for wounds; and my poor Grimaud here was
obliged to dress those you had inflicted on him.”

“All my sausages are gnawed!”

“There is an enormous quantity of rats in that cellar.”

“You shall pay me for all this,” cried the exasperated host.

“Triple ass!” said Athos, rising; but he sank down again immediately. He
had tried his strength to the utmost. D’Artagnan came to his relief with
his whip in his hand.

The host drew back and burst into tears.

“This will teach you,” said d’Artagnan, “to treat the guests God sends
you in a more courteous fashion.”

“God? Say the devil!”

“My dear friend,” said d’Artagnan, “if you annoy us in this manner we
will all four go and shut ourselves up in your cellar, and we will see
if the mischief is as great as you say.”

“Oh, gentlemen,” said the host, “I have been wrong. I confess it, but
pardon to every sin! You are gentlemen, and I am a poor innkeeper. You
will have pity on me.”

“Ah, if you speak in that way,” said Athos, “you will break my heart,
and the tears will flow from my eyes as the wine flowed from the cask.
We are not such devils as we appear to be. Come hither, and let us
talk.”

The host approached with hesitation.

“Come hither, I say, and don’t be afraid,” continued Athos. “At the very
moment when I was about to pay you, I had placed my purse on the table.”

“Yes, monsieur.”

“That purse contained sixty pistoles; where is it?”

“Deposited with the justice; they said it was bad money.”

“Very well; get me my purse back and keep the sixty pistoles.”

“But Monseigneur knows very well that justice never lets go that which
it once lays hold of. If it were bad money, there might be some hopes;
but unfortunately, those were all good pieces.”

“Manage the matter as well as you can, my good man; it does not concern
me, the more so as I have not a livre left.”

“Come,” said d’Artagnan, “let us inquire further. Athos’s horse, where
is that?”

“In the stable.”

“How much is it worth?”

“Fifty pistoles at most.”

“It’s worth eighty. Take it, and there ends the matter.”

“What,” cried Athos, “are you selling my horse--my Bajazet? And pray
upon what shall I make my campaign; upon Grimaud?”

“I have brought you another,” said d’Artagnan.

“Another?”

“And a magnificent one!” cried the host.

“Well, since there is another finer and younger, why, you may take the
old one; and let us drink.”

“What?” asked the host, quite cheerful again.

“Some of that at the bottom, near the laths. There are twenty-five
bottles of it left; all the rest were broken by my fall. Bring six of
them.”

“Why, this man is a cask!” said the host, aside. “If he only remains
here a fortnight, and pays for what he drinks, I shall soon re-establish
my business.”

“And don’t forget,” said d’Artagnan, “to bring up four bottles of the
same sort for the two English gentlemen.”

“And now,” said Athos, “while they bring the wine, tell me, d’Artagnan,
what has become of the others, come!”

D’Artagnan related how he had found Porthos in bed with a strained knee,
and Aramis at a table between two theologians. As he finished, the host
entered with the wine ordered and a ham which, fortunately for him, had
been left out of the cellar.

“That’s well!” said Athos, filling his glass and that of his friend;
“here’s to Porthos and Aramis! But you, d’Artagnan, what is the matter
with you, and what has happened to you personally? You have a sad air.”

“Alas,” said d’Artagnan, “it is because I am the most unfortunate.”

“Tell me.”

“Presently,” said d’Artagnan.

“Presently! And why presently? Because you think I am drunk? D’Artagnan,
remember this! My ideas are never so clear as when I have had plenty of
wine. Speak, then, I am all ears.”

D’Artagnan related his adventure with Mme. Bonacieux. Athos listened to
him without a frown; and when he had finished, said, “Trifles, only
trifles!” That was his favorite word.

“You always say TRIFLES, my dear Athos!” said d’Artagnan, “and that come
very ill from you, who have never loved.”

The drink-deadened eye of Athos flashed out, but only for a moment; it
became as dull and vacant as before.

“That’s true,” said he, quietly, “for my part I have never loved.”

“Acknowledge, then, you stony heart,” said d’Artagnan, “that you are
wrong to be so hard upon us tender hearts.”

“Tender hearts! Pierced hearts!” said Athos.

“What do you say?”

“I say that love is a lottery in which he who wins, wins death! You are
very fortunate to have lost, believe me, my dear d’Artagnan. And if I
have any counsel to give, it is, always lose!”

“She seemed to love me so!”

“She SEEMED, did she?”

“Oh, she DID love me!”

“You child, why, there is not a man who has not believed, as you do,
that his mistress loved him, and there lives not a man who has not been
deceived by his mistress.”

“Except you, Athos, who never had one.”

“That’s true,” said Athos, after a moment’s silence, “that’s true! I
never had one! Let us drink!”

“But then, philosopher that you are,” said d’Artagnan, “instruct me,
support me. I stand in need of being taught and consoled.”

“Consoled for what?”

“For my misfortune.”

“Your misfortune is laughable,” said Athos, shrugging his shoulders; “I
should like to know what you would say if I were to relate to you a real
tale of love!”

“Which has happened to you?”

“Or one of my friends, what matters?”

“Tell it, Athos, tell it.”

“Better if I drink.”

“Drink and relate, then.”

“Not a bad idea!” said Athos, emptying and refilling his glass. “The two
things agree marvelously well.”

“I am all attention,” said d’Artagnan.

Athos collected himself, and in proportion as he did so, d’Artagnan saw
that he became pale. He was at that period of intoxication in which
vulgar drinkers fall on the floor and go to sleep. He kept himself
upright and dreamed, without sleeping. This somnambulism of drunkenness
had something frightful in it.

“You particularly wish it?” asked he.

“I pray for it,” said d’Artagnan.

“Be it then as you desire. One of my friends--one of my friends, please
to observe, not myself,” said Athos, interrupting himself with a
melancholy smile, “one of the counts of my province--that is to say, of
Berry--noble as a Dandolo or a Montmorency, at twenty-five years of age
fell in love with a girl of sixteen, beautiful as fancy can paint.
Through the ingenuousness of her age beamed an ardent mind, not of the
woman, but of the poet. She did not please; she intoxicated. She lived
in a small town with her brother, who was a curate. Both had recently
come into the country. They came nobody knew whence; but when seeing her
so lovely and her brother so pious, nobody thought of asking whence they
came. They were said, however, to be of good extraction. My friend, who
was seigneur of the country, might have seduced her, or taken her by
force, at his will--for he was master. Who would have come to the
assistance of two strangers, two unknown persons? Unfortunately he was
an honorable man; he married her. The fool! The ass! The idiot!”

“How so, if he love her?” asked d’Artagnan.

“Wait,” said Athos. “He took her to his chateau, and made her the first
lady in the province; and in justice it must be allowed that she
supported her rank becomingly.”

“Well?” asked d’Artagnan.

“Well, one day when she was hunting with her husband,” continued Athos,
in a low voice, and speaking very quickly, “she fell from her horse and
fainted. The count flew to her to help, and as she appeared to be
oppressed by her clothes, he ripped them open with his poniard, and in
so doing laid bare her shoulder. D’Artagnan,” said Athos, with a
maniacal burst of laughter, “guess what she had on her shoulder.”

“How can I tell?” said d’Artagnan.

“A FLEUR-DE-LIS,” said Athos. “She was branded.”

Athos emptied at a single draught the glass he held in his hand.

“Horror!” cried d’Artagnan. “What do you tell me?”

“Truth, my friend. The angel was a demon; the poor young girl had stolen
the sacred vessels from a church.”

“And what did the count do?”

“The count was of the highest nobility. He had on his estates the rights
of high and low tribunals. He tore the dress of the countess to pieces;
he tied her hands behind her, and hanged her on a tree.”

“Heavens, Athos, a murder?” cried d’Artagnan.

“No less,” said Athos, as pale as a corpse. “But methinks I need wine!”
and he seized by the neck the last bottle that was left, put it to his
mouth, and emptied it at a single draught, as he would have emptied an
ordinary glass.

Then he let his head sink upon his two hands, while d’Artagnan stood
before him, stupefied.

“That has cured me of beautiful, poetical, and loving women,” said
Athos, after a considerable pause, raising his head, and forgetting to
continue the fiction of the count. “God grant you as much! Let us
drink.”

“Then she is dead?” stammered d’Artagnan.

“PARBLEU!” said Athos. “But hold out your glass. Some ham, my boy, or we
can’t drink.”

“And her brother?” added d’Artagnan, timidly.

“Her brother?” replied Athos.

“Yes, the priest.”

“Oh, I inquired after him for the purpose of hanging him likewise; but
he was beforehand with me, he had quit the curacy the night before.”

“Was it ever known who this miserable fellow was?”

“He was doubtless the first lover and accomplice of the fair lady. A
worthy man, who had pretended to be a curate for the purpose of getting
his mistress married, and securing her a position. He has been hanged
and quartered, I hope.”

“My God, my God!” cried d’Artagnan, quite stunned by the relation of
this horrible adventure.

“Taste some of this ham, d’Artagnan; it is exquisite,” said Athos,
cutting a slice, which he placed on the young man’s plate.

“What a pity it is there were only four like this in the cellar. I could
have drunk fifty bottles more.”

D’Artagnan could no longer endure this conversation, which had made him
bewildered. Allowing his head to sink upon his two hands, he pretended
to sleep.

“These young fellows can none of them drink,” said Athos, looking at him
with pity, “and yet this is one of the best!”




28 THE RETURN


D’Artagnan was astounded by the terrible confidence of Athos; yet many
things appeared very obscure to him in this half revelation. In the
first place it had been made by a man quite drunk to one who was half
drunk; and yet, in spite of the incertainty which the vapor of three or
four bottles of Burgundy carries with it to the brain, d’Artagnan, when
awaking on the following morning, had all the words of Athos as present
to his memory as if they then fell from his mouth--they had been so
impressed upon his mind. All this doubt only gave rise to a more lively
desire of arriving at a certainty, and he went into his friend’s chamber
with a fixed determination of renewing the conversation of the preceding
evening; but he found Athos quite himself again--that is to say, the
most shrewd and impenetrable of men. Besides which, the Musketeer, after
having exchanged a hearty shake of the hand with him, broached the
matter first.

“I was pretty drunk yesterday, d’Artagnan,” said he, “I can tell that by
my tongue, which was swollen and hot this morning, and by my pulse,
which was very tremulous. I wager that I uttered a thousand
extravagances.”

While saying this he looked at his friend with an earnestness that
embarrassed him.

“No,” replied d’Artagnan, “if I recollect well what you said, it was
nothing out of the common way.”

“Ah, you surprise me. I thought I had told you a most lamentable story.”
And he looked at the young man as if he would read the bottom of his
heart.

“My faith,” said d’Artagnan, “it appears that I was more drunk than you,
since I remember nothing of the kind.”

Athos did not trust this reply, and he resumed; “you cannot have failed
to remark, my dear friend, that everyone has his particular kind of
drunkenness, sad or gay. My drunkenness is always sad, and when I am
thoroughly drunk my mania is to relate all the lugubrious stories which
my foolish nurse inculcated into my brain. That is my failing--a capital
failing, I admit; but with that exception, I am a good drinker.”

Athos spoke this in so natural a manner that d’Artagnan was shaken in
his conviction.

“It is that, then,” replied the young man, anxious to find out the
truth, “it is that, then, I remember as we remember a dream. We were
speaking of hanging.”

“Ah, you see how it is,” said Athos, becoming still paler, but yet
attempting to laugh; “I was sure it was so--the hanging of people is my
nightmare.”

“Yes, yes,” replied d’Artagnan. “I remember now; yes, it was about--stop
a minute--yes, it was about a woman.”

“That’s it,” replied Athos, becoming almost livid; “that is my grand
story of the fair lady, and when I relate that, I must be very drunk.”

“Yes, that was it,” said d’Artagnan, “the story of a tall, fair lady,
with blue eyes.”

“Yes, who was hanged.”

“By her husband, who was a nobleman of your acquaintance,” continued
d’Artagnan, looking intently at Athos.

“Well, you see how a man may compromise himself when he does not know
what he says,” replied Athos, shrugging his shoulders as if he thought
himself an object of pity. “I certainly never will get drunk again,
d’Artagnan; it is too bad a habit.”

D’Artagnan remained silent; and then changing the conversation all at
once, Athos said:

“By the by, I thank you for the horse you have brought me.”

“Is it to your mind?” asked d’Artagnan.

“Yes; but it is not a horse for hard work.”

“You are mistaken; I rode him nearly ten leagues in less than an hour
and a half, and he appeared no more distressed than if he had only made
the tour of the Place St. Sulpice.”

“Ah, you begin to awaken my regret.”

“Regret?”

“Yes; I have parted with him.”

“How?”

“Why, here is the simple fact. This morning I awoke at six o’clock. You
were still fast asleep, and I did not know what to do with myself; I was
still stupid from our yesterday’s debauch. As I came into the public
room, I saw one of our Englishman bargaining with a dealer for a horse,
his own having died yesterday from bleeding. I drew near, and found he
was bidding a hundred pistoles for a chestnut nag. ‘PARDIEU,’ said I,
‘my good gentleman, I have a horse to sell, too.’ ‘Ay, and a very fine
one! I saw him yesterday; your friend’s lackey was leading him.’ ‘Do you
think he is worth a hundred pistoles?’ ‘Yes! Will you sell him to me for
that sum?’ ‘No; but I will play for him.’ ‘What?’ ‘At dice.’ No sooner
said than done, and I lost the horse. Ah, ah! But please to observe I
won back the equipage,” cried Athos.

D’Artagnan looked much disconcerted.

“This vexes you?” said Athos.

“Well, I must confess it does,” replied d’Artagnan. “That horse was to
have identified us in the day of battle. It was a pledge, a remembrance.
Athos, you have done wrong.”

“But, my dear friend, put yourself in my place,” replied the Musketeer.
“I was hipped to death; and still further, upon my honor, I don’t like
English horses. If it is only to be recognized, why the saddle will
suffice for that; it is quite remarkable enough. As to the horse, we can
easily find some excuse for its disappearance. Why the devil! A horse is
mortal; suppose mine had had the glanders or the farcy?”

D’Artagnan did not smile.

“It vexes me greatly,” continued Athos, “that you attach so much
importance to these animals, for I am not yet at the end of my story.”

“What else have you done.”

“After having lost my own horse, nine against ten--see how near--I
formed an idea of staking yours.”

“Yes; but you stopped at the idea, I hope?”

“No; for I put it in execution that very minute.”

“And the consequence?” said d’Artagnan, in great anxiety.

“I threw, and I lost.”

“What, my horse?”

“Your horse, seven against eight; a point short--you know the proverb.”

“Athos, you are not in your right senses, I swear.”

“My dear lad, that was yesterday, when I was telling you silly stories,
it was proper to tell me that, and not this morning. I lost him then,
with all his appointments and furniture.”

“Really, this is frightful.”

“Stop a minute; you don’t know all yet. I should make an excellent
gambler if I were not too hot-headed; but I was hot-headed, just as if I
had been drinking. Well, I was not hot-headed then--”

“Well, but what else could you play for? You had nothing left?”

“Oh, yes, my friend; there was still that diamond left which sparkles on
your finger, and which I had observed yesterday.”

“This diamond!” said d’Artagnan, placing his hand eagerly on his ring.

“And as I am a connoisseur in such things, having had a few of my own
once, I estimated it at a thousand pistoles.”

“I hope,” said d’Artagnan, half dead with fright, “you made no mention
of my diamond?”

“On the contrary, my dear friend, this diamond became our only resource;
with it I might regain our horses and their harnesses, and even money to
pay our expenses on the road.”

“Athos, you make me tremble!” cried d’Artagnan.

“I mentioned your diamond then to my adversary, who had likewise
remarked it. What the devil, my dear, do you think you can wear a star
from heaven on your finger, and nobody observe it? Impossible!”

“Go on, go on, my dear fellow!” said d’Artagnan; “for upon my honor, you
will kill me with your indifference.”

“We divided, then, this diamond into ten parts of a hundred pistoles
each.”

“You are laughing at me, and want to try me!” said d’Artagnan, whom
anger began to take by the hair, as Minerva takes Achilles, in the
ILLIAD.

“No, I do not jest, MORDIEU! I should like to have seen you in my place!
I had been fifteen days without seeing a human face, and had been left
to brutalize myself in the company of bottles.”

“That was no reason for staking my diamond!” replied d’Artagnan, closing
his hand with a nervous spasm.

“Hear the end. Ten parts of a hundred pistoles each, in ten throws,
without revenge; in thirteen throws I had lost all--in thirteen throws.
The number thirteen was always fatal to me; it was on the thirteenth of
July that--”

“VENTREBLEU!” cried d’Artagnan, rising from the table, the story of the
present day making him forget that of the preceding one.

“Patience!” said Athos; “I had a plan. The Englishman was an original; I
had seen him conversing that morning with Grimaud, and Grimaud had told
me that he had made him proposals to enter into his service. I staked
Grimaud, the silent Grimaud, divided into ten portions.”

“Well, what next?” said d’Artagnan, laughing in spite of himself.

“Grimaud himself, understand; and with the ten parts of Grimaud, which
are not worth a ducatoon, I regained the diamond. Tell me, now, if
persistence is not a virtue?”

“My faith! But this is droll,” cried d’Artagnan, consoled, and holding
his sides with laughter.

“You may guess, finding the luck turned, that I again staked the
diamond.”

“The devil!” said d’Artagnan, becoming angry again.

“I won back your harness, then your horse, then my harness, then my
horse, and then I lost again. In brief, I regained your harness and then
mine. That’s where we are. That was a superb throw, so I left off
there.”

D’Artagnan breathed as if the whole hostelry had been removed from his
breast.

“Then the diamond is safe?” said he, timidly.

“Intact, my dear friend; besides the harness of your Bucephalus and
mine.”

“But what is the use of harnesses without horses?”

“I have an idea about them.”

“Athos, you make me shudder.”

“Listen to me. You have not played for a long time, d’Artagnan.”

“And I have no inclination to play.”

“Swear to nothing. You have not played for a long time, I said; you
ought, then, to have a good hand.”

“Well, what then?”

“Well; the Englishman and his companion are still here. I remarked that
he regretted the horse furniture very much. You appear to think much of
your horse. In your place I would stake the furniture against the
horse.”

“But he will not wish for only one harness.”

“Stake both, PARDIEU! I am not selfish, as you are.”

“You would do so?” said d’Artagnan, undecided, so strongly did the
confidence of Athos begin to prevail, in spite of himself.

“On my honor, in one single throw.”

“But having lost the horses, I am particularly anxious to preserve the
harnesses.”

“Stake your diamond, then.”

“This? That’s another matter. Never, never!”

“The devil!” said Athos. “I would propose to you to stake Planchet, but
as that has already been done, the Englishman would not, perhaps, be
willing.”

“Decidedly, my dear Athos,” said d’Artagnan, “I should like better not
to risk anything.”

“That’s a pity,” said Athos, coolly. “The Englishman is overflowing with
pistoles. Good Lord, try one throw! One throw is soon made!”

“And if I lose?”

“You will win.”

“But if I lose?”

“Well, you will surrender the harnesses.”

“Have with you for one throw!” said d’Artagnan.

Athos went in quest of the Englishman, whom he found in the stable,
examining the harnesses with a greedy eye. The opportunity was good. He
proposed the conditions--the two harnesses, either against one horse or
a hundred pistoles. The Englishman calculated fast; the two harnesses
were worth three hundred pistoles. He consented.

D’Artagnan threw the dice with a trembling hand, and turned up the
number three; his paleness terrified Athos, who, however, consented
himself with saying, “That’s a sad throw, comrade; you will have the
horses fully equipped, monsieur.”

The Englishman, quite triumphant, did not even give himself the trouble
to shake the dice. He threw them on the table without looking at them,
so sure was he of victory; d’Artagnan turned aside to conceal his ill
humor.

“Hold, hold, hold!” said Athos, wit his quiet tone; “that throw of the
dice is extraordinary. I have not seen such a one four times in my life.
Two aces!”

The Englishman looked, and was seized with astonishment. D’Artagnan
looked, and was seized with pleasure.

“Yes,” continued Athos, “four times only; once at the house of Monsieur
Crequy; another time at my own house in the country, in my chateau
at--when I had a chateau; a third time at Monsieur de Treville’s where
it surprised us all; and the fourth time at a cabaret, where it fell to
my lot, and where I lost a hundred louis and a supper on it.”

“Then Monsieur takes his horse back again,” said the Englishman.

“Certainly,” said d’Artagnan.

“Then there is no revenge?”

“Our conditions said, ‘No revenge,’ you will please to recollect.”

“That is true; the horse shall be restored to your lackey, monsieur.”

“A moment,” said Athos; “with your permission, monsieur, I wish to speak
a word with my friend.”

“Say on.”

Athos drew d’Artagnan aside.

“Well, Tempter, what more do you want with me?” said d’Artagnan. “You
want me to throw again, do you not?”

“No, I would wish you to reflect.”

“On what?”

“You mean to take your horse?”

“Without doubt.”

“You are wrong, then. I would take the hundred pistoles. You know you
have staked the harnesses against the horse or a hundred pistoles, at
your choice.”

“Yes.”

“Well, then, I repeat, you are wrong. What is the use of one horse for
us two? I could not ride behind. We should look like the two sons of
Anmon, who had lost their brother. You cannot think of humiliating me by
prancing along by my side on that magnificent charger. For my part, I
should not hesitate a moment; I should take the hundred pistoles. We
want money for our return to Paris.”

“I am much attached to that horse, Athos.”

“And there again you are wrong. A horse slips and injures a joint; a
horse stumbles and breaks his knees to the bone; a horse eats out of a
manger in which a glandered horse has eaten. There is a horse, while on
the contrary, the hundred pistoles feed their master.”

“But how shall we get back?”

“Upon our lackey’s horses, PARDIEU. Anybody may see by our bearing that
we are people of condition.”

“Pretty figures we shall cut on ponies while Aramis and Porthos caracole
on their steeds.”

“Aramis! Porthos!” cried Athos, and laughed aloud.

“What is it?” asked d’Artagnan, who did not at all comprehend the
hilarity of his friend.

“Nothing, nothing! Go on!”

“Your advice, then?”

“To take the hundred pistoles, d’Artagnan. With the hundred pistoles we
can live well to the end of the month. We have undergone a great deal of
fatigue, remember, and a little rest will do no harm.”

“I rest? Oh, no, Athos. Once in Paris, I shall prosecute my search for
that unfortunate woman!”

“Well, you may be assured that your horse will not be half so
serviceable to you for that purpose as good golden louis. Take the
hundred pistoles, my friend; take the hundred pistoles!”

D’Artagnan only required one reason to be satisfied. This last reason
appeared convincing. Besides, he feared that by resisting longer he
should appear selfish in the eyes of Athos. He acquiesced, therefore,
and chose the hundred pistoles, which the Englishman paid down on the
spot.

They then determined to depart. Peace with the landlord, in addition to
Athos’s old horse, cost six pistoles. D’Artagnan and Athos took the nags
of Planchet and Grimaud, and the two lackeys started on foot, carrying
the saddles on their heads.

However ill our two friends were mounted, they were soon far in advance
of their servants, and arrived at Creveccoeur. From a distance they
perceived Aramis, seated in a melancholy manner at his window, looking
out, like Sister Anne, at the dust in the horizon.

“HOLA, Aramis! What the devil are you doing there?” cried the two
friends.

“Ah, is that you, d’Artagnan, and you, Athos?” said the young man. “I
was reflecting upon the rapidity with which the blessings of this world
leave us. My English horse, which has just disappeared amid a cloud of
dust, has furnished me with a living image of the fragility of the
things of the earth. Life itself may be resolved into three words: ERAT,
EST, FUIT.”

“Which means--” said d’Artagnan, who began to suspect the truth.

“Which means that I have just been duped-sixty louis for a horse which
by the manner of his gait can do at least five leagues an hour.”

D’Artagnan and Athos laughed aloud.

“My dear d’Artagnan,” said Aramis, “don’t be too angry with me, I beg.
Necessity has no law; besides, I am the person punished, as that
rascally horsedealer has robbed me of fifty louis, at least. Ah, you
fellows are good managers! You ride on our lackey’s horses, and have
your own gallant steeds led along carefully by hand, at short stages.”

At the same instant a market cart, which some minutes before had
appeared upon the Amiens road, pulled up at the inn, and Planchet and
Grimaud came out of it with the saddles on their heads. The cart was
returning empty to Paris, and the two lackeys had agreed, for their
transport, to slake the wagoner’s thirst along the route.

“What is this?” said Aramis, on seeing them arrive. “Nothing but
saddles?”

“Now do you understand?” said Athos.

“My friends, that’s exactly like me! I retained my harness by instinct.
HOLA, Bazin! Bring my new saddle and carry it along with those of these
gentlemen.”

“And what have you done with your ecclesiastics?” asked d’Artagnan.

“My dear fellow, I invited them to a dinner the next day,” replied
Aramis. “They have some capital wine here--please to observe that in
passing. I did my best to make them drunk. Then the curate forbade me to
quit my uniform, and the Jesuit entreated me to get him made a
Musketeer.”

“Without a thesis?” cried d’Artagnan, “without a thesis? I demand the
suppression of the thesis.”

“Since then,” continued Aramis, “I have lived very agreeably. I have
begun a poem in verses of one syllable. That is rather difficult, but
the merit in all things consists in the difficulty. The matter is
gallant. I will read you the first canto. It has four hundred lines, and
lasts a minute.”

“My faith, my dear Aramis,” said d’Artagnan, who detested verses almost
as much as he did Latin, “add to the merit of the difficulty that of the
brevity, and you are sure that your poem will at least have two merits.”

“You will see,” continued Aramis, “that it breathes irreproachable
passion. And so, my friends, we return to Paris? Bravo! I am ready. We
are going to rejoin that good fellow, Porthos. So much the better. You
can’t think how I have missed him, the great simpleton. To see him so
self-satisfied reconciles me with myself. He would not sell his horse;
not for a kingdom! I think I can see him now, mounted upon his superb
animal and seated in his handsome saddle. I am sure he will look like
the Great Mogul!”

They made a halt for an hour to refresh their horses. Aramis discharged
his bill, placed Bazin in the cart with his comrades, and they set
forward to join Porthos.

They found him up, less pale than when d’Artagnan left him after his
first visit, and seated at a table on which, though he was alone, was
spread enough for four persons. This dinner consisted of meats nicely
dressed, choice wines, and superb fruit.

“Ah, PARDIEU!” said he, rising, “you come in the nick of time,
gentlemen. I was just beginning the soup, and you will dine with me.”

“Oh, oh!” said d’Artagnan, “Mousqueton has not caught these bottles with
his lasso. Besides, here is a piquant FRICANDEAU and a fillet of beef.”

“I am recruiting myself,” said Porthos, “I am recruiting myself. Nothing
weakens a man more than these devilish strains. Did you ever suffer from
a strain, Athos?”

“Never! Though I remember, in our affair of the Rue Ferou, I received a
sword wound which at the end of fifteen or eighteen days produced the
same effect.”

“But this dinner was not intended for you alone, Porthos?” said Aramis.

“No,” said Porthos, “I expected some gentlemen of the neighborhood, who
have just sent me word they could not come. You will take their places
and I shall not lose by the exchange. HOLA, Mousqueton, seats, and order
double the bottles!”

“Do you know what we are eating here?” said Athos, at the end of ten
minutes.

“PARDIEU!” replied d’Artagnan, “for my part, I am eating veal garnished
with shrimps and vegetables.”

“And I some lamb chops,” said Porthos.

“And I a plain chicken,” said Aramis.

“You are all mistaken, gentlemen,” answered Athos, gravely; “you are
eating horse.”

“Eating what?” said d’Artagnan.

“Horse!” said Aramis, with a grimace of disgust.

Porthos alone made no reply.

“Yes, horse. Are we not eating a horse, Porthos? And perhaps his saddle,
therewith.”

“No, gentlemen, I have kept the harness,” said Porthos.

“My faith,” said Aramis, “we are all alike. One would think we had
tipped the wink.”

“What could I do?” said Porthos. “This horse made my visitors ashamed of
theirs, and I don’t like to humiliate people.”

“Then your duchess is still at the waters?” asked d’Artagnan.

“Still,” replied Porthos. “And, my faith, the governor of the
province--one of the gentlemen I expected today--seemed to have such a
wish for him, that I gave him to him.”

“Gave him?” cried d’Artagnan.

“My God, yes, GAVE, that is the word,” said Porthos; “for the animal was
worth at least a hundred and fifty louis, and the stingy fellow would
only give me eighty.”

“Without the saddle?” said Aramis.

“Yes, without the saddle.”

“You will observe, gentlemen,” said Athos, “that Porthos has made the
best bargain of any of us.”

And then commenced a roar of laughter in which they all joined, to the
astonishment of poor Porthos; but when he was informed of the cause of
their hilarity, he shared it vociferously according to his custom.

“There is one comfort, we are all in cash,” said d’Artagnan.

“Well, for my part,” said Athos, “I found Aramis’s Spanish wine so good
that I sent on a hamper of sixty bottles of it in the wagon with the
lackeys. That has weakened my purse.”

“And I,” said Aramis, “imagined that I had given almost my last sou to
the church of Montdidier and the Jesuits of Amiens, with whom I had made
engagements which I ought to have kept. I have ordered Masses for
myself, and for you, gentlemen, which will be said, gentlemen, for which
I have not the least doubt you will be marvelously benefited.”

“And I,” said Porthos, “do you think my strain cost me nothing?--without
reckoning Mousqueton’s wound, for which I had to have the surgeon twice
a day, and who charged me double on account of that foolish Mousqueton
having allowed himself a ball in a part which people generally only show
to an apothecary; so I advised him to try never to get wounded there any
more.”

“Ay, ay!” said Athos, exchanging a smile with d’Artagnan and Aramis, “it
is very clear you acted nobly with regard to the poor lad; that is like
a good master.”

“In short,” said Porthos, “when all my expenses are paid, I shall have,
at most, thirty crowns left.”

“And I about ten pistoles,” said Aramis.

“Well, then it appears that we are the Croesuses of the society. How
much have you left of your hundred pistoles, d’Artagnan?”

“Of my hundred pistoles? Why, in the first place I gave you fifty.”

“You think so?”

“PARDIEU!”
       “Ah, that is true. I recollect.”

“Then I paid the host six.”

“What a brute of a host! Why did you give him six pistoles?”

“You told me to give them to him.”

“It is true; I am too good-natured. In brief, how much remains?”

“Twenty-five pistoles,” said d’Artagnan.

“And I,” said Athos, taking some small change from his pocket, “I--”

“You? Nothing!”

“My faith! So little that it is not worth reckoning with the general
stock.”

“Now, then, let us calculate how much we posses in all.”

“Porthos?”

“Thirty crowns.”

“Aramis?”

“Ten pistoles.”

“And you, d’Artagnan?”

“Twenty-five.”

“That makes in all?” said Athos.

“Four hundred and seventy-five livres,” said d’Artagnan, who reckoned
like Archimedes.

“On our arrival in Paris, we shall still have four hundred, besides the
harnesses,” said Porthos.

“But our troop horses?” said Aramis.

“Well, of the four horses of our lackeys we will make two for the
masters, for which we will draw lots. With the four hundred livres we
will make the half of one for one of the unmounted, and then we will
give the turnings out of our pockets to d’Artagnan, who has a steady
hand, and will go and play in the first gaming house we come to. There!”

“Let us dine, then,” said Porthos; “it is getting cold.”

The friends, at ease with regard to the future, did honor to the repast,
the remains of which were abandoned to Mousqueton, Bazin, Planchet, and
Grimaud.

On arriving in Paris, d’Artagnan found a letter from M. de Treville,
which informed him that, at his request, the king had promised that he
should enter the company of the Musketeers.

As this was the height of d’Artagnan’s worldly ambition--apart, be it
well understood, from his desire of finding Mme. Bonacieux--he ran, full
of joy, to seek his comrades, whom he had left only half an hour before,
but whom he found very sad and deeply preoccupied. They were assembled
in council at the residence of Athos, which always indicated an event of
some gravity. M. de Treville had intimated to them his Majesty’s fixed
intention to open the campaign on the first of May, and they must
immediately prepare their outfits.

The four philosophers looked at one another in a state of bewilderment.
M. de Treville never jested in matters relating to discipline.

“And what do you reckon your outfit will cost?” said d’Artagnan.

“Oh, we can scarcely say. We have made our calculations with Spartan
economy, and we each require fifteen hundred livres.”

“Four times fifteen makes sixty--six thousand livres,” said Athos.

“It seems to me,” said d’Artagnan, “with a thousand livres each--I do
not speak as a Spartan, but as a procurator--”

This word PROCURATOR roused Porthos. “Stop,” said he, “I have an idea.”

“Well, that’s something, for I have not the shadow of one,” said Athos
coolly; “but as to d’Artagnan, gentlemen, the idea of belonging to OURS
has driven him out of his senses. A thousand livres! For my part, I
declare I want two thousand.”

“Four times two makes eight,” then said Aramis; “it is eight thousand
that we want to complete our outfits, toward which, it is true, we have
already the saddles.”

“Besides,” said Athos, waiting till d’Artagnan, who went to thank
Monsieur de Treville, had shut the door, “besides, there is that
beautiful ring which beams from the finger of our friend. What the
devil! D’Artagnan is too good a comrade to leave his brothers in
embarrassment while he wears the ransom of a king on his finger.”




29 HUNTING FOR THE EQUIPMENTS


The most preoccupied of the four friends was certainly d’Artagnan,
although he, in his quality of Guardsman, would be much more easily
equipped than Messieurs the Musketeers, who were all of high rank; but
our Gascon cadet was, as may have been observed, of a provident and
almost avaricious character, and with that (explain the contradiction)
so vain as almost to rival Porthos. To this preoccupation of his vanity,
d’Artagnan at this moment joined an uneasiness much less selfish.
Notwithstanding all his inquiries respecting Mme. Bonacieux, he could
obtain no intelligence of her. M. de Treville had spoken of her to the
queen. The queen was ignorant where the mercer’s young wife was, but had
promised to have her sought for; but this promise was very vague and did
not at all reassure d’Artagnan.

Athos did not leave his chamber; he made up his mind not to take a
single step to equip himself.

“We have still fifteen days before us,” said he to his friends, “well,
if at the end of a fortnight I have found nothing, or rather if nothing
has come to find me, as I, too good a Catholic to kill myself with a
pistol bullet, I will seek a good quarrel with four of his Eminence’s
Guards or with eight Englishmen, and I will fight until one of them has
killed me, which, considering the number, cannot fail to happen. It will
then be said of me that I died for the king; so that I shall have
performed my duty without the expense of an outfit.”

Porthos continued to walk about with his hands behind him, tossing his
head and repeating, “I shall follow up on my idea.”

Aramis, anxious and negligently dressed, said nothing.

It may be seen by these disastrous details that desolation reigned in
the community.

The lackeys on their part, like the coursers of Hippolytus, shared the
sadness of their masters. Mousqueton collected a store of crusts; Bazin,
who had always been inclined to devotion, never quit the churches;
Planchet watched the flight of flies; and Grimaud, whom the general
distress could not induce to break the silence imposed by his master,
heaved sighs enough to soften the stones.

The three friends--for, as we have said, Athos had sworn not to stir a
foot to equip himself--went out early in the morning, and returned late
at night. They wandered about the streets, looking at the pavement as if
to see whether the passengers had not left a purse behind them. They
might have been supposed to be following tracks, so observant were they
wherever they went. When they met they looked desolately at one another,
as much as to say, “Have you found anything?”

However, as Porthos had first found an idea, and had thought of it
earnestly afterward, he was the first to act. He was a man of execution,
this worthy Porthos. D’Artagnan perceived him one day walking toward the
church of St. Leu, and followed him instinctively. He entered, after
having twisted his mustache and elongated his imperial, which always
announced on his part the most triumphant resolutions. As d’Artagnan
took some precautions to conceal himself, Porthos believed he had not
been seen. D’Artagnan entered behind him. Porthos went and leaned
against the side of a pillar. D’Artagnan, still unperceived, supported
himself against the other side.

There happened to be a sermon, which made the church very full of
people. Porthos took advantage of this circumstance to ogle the women.
Thanks to the cares of Mousqueton, the exterior was far from announcing
the distress of the interior. His hat was a little napless, his feather
was a little faded, his gold lace was a little tarnished, his laces were
a trifle frayed; but in the obscurity of the church these things were
not seen, and Porthos was still the handsome Porthos.

D’Artagnan observed, on the bench nearest to the pillar against which
Porthos leaned, a sort of ripe beauty, rather yellow and rather dry, but
erect and haughty under her black hood. The eyes of Porthos were
furtively cast upon this lady, and then roved about at large over the
nave.

On her side the lady, who from time to time blushed, darted with the
rapidity of lightning a glance toward the inconstant Porthos; and then
immediately the eyes of Porthos wandered anxiously. It was plain that
this mode of proceeding piqued the lady in the black hood, for she bit
her lips till they bled, scratched the end of her nose, and could not
sit still in her seat.

Porthos, seeing this, retwisted his mustache, elongated his imperial a
second time, and began to make signals to a beautiful lady who was near
the choir, and who not only was a beautiful lady, but still further, no
doubt, a great lady--for she had behind her a Negro boy who had brought
the cushion on which she knelt, and a female servant who held the
emblazoned bag in which was placed the book from which she read the
Mass.

The lady with the black hood followed through all their wanderings the
looks of Porthos, and perceived that they rested upon the lady with the
velvet cushion, the little Negro, and the maid-servant.

During this time Porthos played close. It was almost imperceptible
motions of his eyes, fingers placed upon the lips, little assassinating
smiles, which really did assassinate the disdained beauty.

Then she cried, “Ahem!” under cover of the MEA CULPA, striking her
breast so vigorously that everybody, even the lady with the red cushion,
turned round toward her. Porthos paid no attention. Nevertheless, he
understood it all, but was deaf.

The lady with the red cushion produced a great effect--for she was very
handsome--upon the lady with the black hood, who saw in her a rival
really to be dreaded; a great effect upon Porthos, who thought her much
prettier than the lady with the black hood; a great effect upon
d’Artagnan, who recognized in her the lady of Meung, of Calais, and of
Dover, whom his persecutor, the man with the scar, had saluted by the
name of Milady.

D’Artagnan, without losing sight of the lady of the red cushion,
continued to watch the proceedings of Porthos, which amused him greatly.
He guessed that the lady of the black hood was the procurator’s wife of
the Rue aux Ours, which was the more probable from the church of St. Leu
being not far from that locality.

He guessed, likewise, by induction, that Porthos was taking his revenge
for the defeat of Chantilly, when the procurator’s wife had proved so
refractory with respect to her purse.

Amid all this, d’Artagnan remarked also that not one countenance
responded to the gallantries of Porthos. There were only chimeras and
illusions; but for real love, for true jealousy, is there any reality
except illusions and chimeras?

The sermon over, the procurator’s wife advanced toward the holy font.
Porthos went before her, and instead of a finger, dipped his whole hand
in. The procurator’s wife smiled, thinking that it was for her Porthos
had put himself to this trouble; but she was cruelly and promptly
undeceived. When she was only about three steps from him, he turned his
head round, fixing his eyes steadfastly upon the lady with the red
cushion, who had risen and was approaching, followed by her black boy
and her woman.

When the lady of the red cushion came close to Porthos, Porthos drew his
dripping hand from the font. The fair worshipper touched the great hand
of Porthos with her delicate fingers, smiled, made the sign of the
cross, and left the church.

This was too much for the procurator’s wife; she doubted not there was
an intrigue between this lady and Porthos. If she had been a great lady
she would have fainted; but as she was only a procurator’s wife, she
contented herself saying to the Musketeer with concentrated fury, “Eh,
Monsieur Porthos, you don’t offer me any holy water?”

Porthos, at the sound of that voice, started like a man awakened from a
sleep of a hundred years.

“Ma-madame!” cried he; “is that you? How is your husband, our dear
Monsieur Coquenard? Is he still as stingy as ever? Where can my eyes
have been not to have seen you during the two hours of the sermon?”

“I was within two paces of you, monsieur,” replied the procurator’s
wife; “but you did not perceive me because you had no eyes but for the
pretty lady to whom you just now gave the holy water.”

Porthos pretended to be confused. “Ah,” said he, “you have remarked--”

“I must have been blind not to have seen.”

“Yes,” said Porthos, “that is a duchess of my acquaintance whom I have
great trouble to meet on account of the jealousy of her husband, and who
sent me word that she should come today to this poor church, buried in
this vile quarter, solely for the sake of seeing me.”

“Monsieur Porthos,” said the procurator’s wife, “will you have the
kindness to offer me your arm for five minutes? I have something to say
to you.”

“Certainly, madame,” said Porthos, winking to himself, as a gambler does
who laughs at the dupe he is about to pluck.

At that moment d’Artagnan passed in pursuit of Milady; he cast a passing
glance at Porthos, and beheld this triumphant look.

“Eh, eh!” said he, reasoning to himself according to the strangely easy
morality of that gallant period, “there is one who will be equipped in
good time!”

Porthos, yielding to the pressure of the arm of the procurator’s wife,
as a bark yields to the rudder, arrived at the cloister St. Magloire--a
little-frequented passage, enclosed with a turnstile at each end. In the
daytime nobody was seen there but mendicants devouring their crusts, and
children at play.

“Ah, Monsieur Porthos,” cried the procurator’s wife, when she was
assured that no one who was a stranger to the population of the locality
could either see or hear her, “ah, Monsieur Porthos, you are a great
conqueror, as it appears!”

“I, madame?” said Porthos, drawing himself up proudly; “how so?”

“The signs just now, and the holy water! But that must be a princess, at
least--that lady with her Negro boy and her maid!”

“My God! Madame, you are deceived,” said Porthos; “she is simply a
duchess.”

“And that running footman who waited at the door, and that carriage with
a coachman in grand livery who sat waiting on his seat?”

Porthos had seen neither the footman nor the carriage, but with the eye
of a jealous woman, Mme. Coquenard had seen everything.

Porthos regretted that he had not at once made the lady of the red
cushion a princess.

“Ah, you are quite the pet of the ladies, Monsieur Porthos!” resumed the
procurator’s wife, with a sigh.

“Well,” responded Porthos, “you may imagine, with the physique with
which nature has endowed me, I am not in want of good luck.”

“Good Lord, how quickly men forget!” cried the procurator’s wife,
raising her eyes toward heaven.

“Less quickly than the women, it seems to me,” replied Porthos; “for I,
madame, I may say I was your victim, when wounded, dying, I was
abandoned by the surgeons. I, the offspring of a noble family, who
placed reliance upon your friendship--I was near dying of my wounds at
first, and of hunger afterward, in a beggarly inn at Chantilly, without
you ever deigning once to reply to the burning letters I addressed to
you.”

“But, Monsieur Porthos,” murmured the procurator’s wife, who began to
feel that, to judge by the conduct of the great ladies of the time, she
was wrong.

“I, who had sacrificed for you the Baronne de--”

“I know it well.”

“The Comtesse de--”

“Monsieur Porthos, be generous!”

“You are right, madame, and I will not finish.”

“But it was my husband who would not hear of lending.”

“Madame Coquenard,” said Porthos, “remember the first letter you wrote
me, and which I preserve engraved in my memory.”

The procurator’s wife uttered a groan.

“Besides,” said she, “the sum you required me to borrow was rather
large.”

“Madame Coquenard, I gave you the preference. I had but to write to the
Duchesse--but I won’t repeat her name, for I am incapable of
compromising a woman; but this I know, that I had but to write to her
and she would have sent me fifteen hundred.”

The procurator’s wife shed a tear.

“Monsieur Porthos,” said she, “I can assure you that you have severely
punished me; and if in the time to come you should find yourself in a
similar situation, you have but to apply to me.”

“Fie, madame, fie!” said Porthos, as if disgusted. “Let us not talk
about money, if you please; it is humiliating.”

“Then you no longer love me!” said the procurator’s wife, slowly and
sadly.

Porthos maintained a majestic silence.

“And that is the only reply you make? Alas, I understand.”

“Think of the offense you have committed toward me, madame! It remains
HERE!” said Porthos, placing his hand on his heart, and pressing it
strongly.

“I will repair it, indeed I will, my dear Porthos.”

“Besides, what did I ask of you?” resumed Porthos, with a movement of
the shoulders full of good fellowship. “A loan, nothing more! After all,
I am not an unreasonable man. I know you are not rich, Madame Coquenard,
and that your husband is obliged to bleed his poor clients to squeeze a
few paltry crowns from them. Oh! If you were a duchess, a marchioness,
or a countess, it would be quite a different thing; it would be
unpardonable.”

The procurator’s wife was piqued.

“Please to know, Monsieur Porthos,” said she, “that my strongbox, the
strongbox of a procurator’s wife though it may be, is better filled than
those of your affected minxes.”

“That doubles the offense,” said Porthos, disengaging his arm from that
of the procurator’s wife; “for if you are rich, Madame Coquenard, then
there is no excuse for your refusal.”

“When I said rich,” replied the procurator’s wife, who saw that she had
gone too far, “you must not take the word literally. I am not precisely
rich, though I am pretty well off.”

“Hold, madame,” said Porthos, “let us say no more upon the subject, I
beg of you. You have misunderstood me, all sympathy is extinct between
us.”

“Ingrate that you are!”

“Ah! I advise you to complain!” said Porthos.

“Begone, then, to your beautiful duchess; I will detain you no longer.”

“And she is not to be despised, in my opinion.”

“Now, Monsieur Porthos, once more, and this is the last! Do you love me
still?”

“Ah, madame,” said Porthos, in the most melancholy tone he could assume,
“when we are about to enter upon a campaign--a campaign, in which my
presentiments tell me I shall be killed--”

“Oh, don’t talk of such things!” cried the procurator’s wife, bursting
into tears.

“Something whispers me so,” continued Porthos, becoming more and more
melancholy.

“Rather say that you have a new love.”

“Not so; I speak frankly to you. No object affects me; and I even feel
here, at the bottom of my heart, something which speaks for you. But in
fifteen days, as you know, or as you do not know, this fatal campaign is
to open. I shall be fearfully preoccupied with my outfit. Then I must
make a journey to see my family, in the lower part of Brittany, to
obtain the sum necessary for my departure.”

Porthos observed a last struggle between love and avarice.

“And as,” continued he, “the duchess whom you saw at the church has
estates near to those of my family, we mean to make the journey
together. Journeys, you know, appear much shorter when we travel two in
company.”

“Have you no friends in Paris, then, Monsieur Porthos?” said the
procurator’s wife.

“I thought I had,” said Porthos, resuming his melancholy air; “but I
have been taught my mistake.”

“You have some!” cried the procurator’s wife, in a transport that
surprised even herself. “Come to our house tomorrow. You are the son of
my aunt, consequently my cousin; you come from Noyon, in Picardy; you
have several lawsuits and no attorney. Can you recollect all that?”

“Perfectly, madame.”

“Come at dinnertime.”

“Very well.”

“And be upon your guard before my husband, who is rather shrewd,
notwithstanding his seventy-six years.”

“Seventy-six years! PESTE! That’s a fine age!” replied Porthos.

“A great age, you mean, Monsieur Porthos. Yes, the poor man may be
expected to leave me a widow, any hour,” continued she, throwing a
significant glance at Porthos. “Fortunately, by our marriage contract,
the survivor takes everything.”

“All?”

“Yes, all.”

“You are a woman of precaution, I see, my dear Madame Coquenard,” said
Porthos, squeezing the hand of the procurator’s wife tenderly.

“We are then reconciled, dear Monsieur Porthos?” said she, simpering.

“For life,” replied Porthos, in the same manner.

“Till we meet again, then, dear traitor!”

“Till we meet again, my forgetful charmer!”

“Tomorrow, my angel!”

“Tomorrow, flame of my life!”




30 D’ARTAGNAN AND THE ENGLISHMAN


D’Artagnan followed Milady without being perceived by her. He saw her
get into her carriage, and heard her order the coachman to drive to St.
Germain.

It was useless to try to keep pace on foot with a carriage drawn by two
powerful horses. D’Artagnan therefore returned to the Rue Ferou.

In the Rue de Seine he met Planchet, who had stopped before the house of
a pastry cook, and was contemplating with ecstasy a cake of the most
appetizing appearance.

He ordered him to go and saddle two horses in M. de Treville’s
stables--one for himself, d’Artagnan, and one for Planchet--and bring
them to Athos’s place. Once for all, Treville had placed his stable at
d’Artagnan’s service.

Planchet proceeded toward the Rue du Colombier, and d’Artagnan toward
the Rue Ferou. Athos was at home, emptying sadly a bottle of the famous
Spanish wine he had brought back with him from his journey into Picardy.
He made a sign for Grimaud to bring a glass for d’Artagnan, and Grimaud
obeyed as usual.

D’Artagnan related to Athos all that had passed at the church between
Porthos and the procurator’s wife, and how their comrade was probably by
that time in a fair way to be equipped.

“As for me,” replied Athos to this recital, “I am quite at my ease; it
will not be women that will defray the expense of my outfit.”

“Handsome, well-bred, noble lord as you are, my dear Athos, neither
princesses nor queens would be secure from your amorous solicitations.”

“How young this d’Artagnan is!” said Athos, shrugging his shoulders; and
he made a sign to Grimaud to bring another bottle.

At that moment Planchet put his head modestly in at the half-open door,
and told his master that the horses were ready.

“What horses?” asked Athos.

“Two horses that Monsieur de Treville lends me at my pleasure, and with
which I am now going to take a ride to St. Germain.”

“Well, and what are you going to do at St. Germain?” then demanded
Athos.

Then d’Artagnan described the meeting which he had at the church, and
how he had found that lady who, with the seigneur in the black cloak and
with the scar near his temple, filled his mind constantly.

“That is to say, you are in love with this lady as you were with Madame
Bonacieux,” said Athos, shrugging his shoulders contemptuously, as if he
pitied human weakness.

“I? not at all!” said d’Artagnan. “I am only curious to unravel the
mystery to which she is attached. I do not know why, but I imagine that
this woman, wholly unknown to me as she is, and wholly unknown to her as
I am, has an influence over my life.”

“Well, perhaps you are right,” said Athos. “I do not know a woman that
is worth the trouble of being sought for when she is once lost. Madame
Bonacieux is lost; so much the worse for her if she is found.”

“No, Athos, no, you are mistaken,” said d’Artagnan; “I love my poor
Constance more than ever, and if I knew the place in which she is, were
it at the end of the world, I would go to free her from the hands of her
enemies; but I am ignorant. All my researches have been useless. What is
to be said? I must divert my attention!”

“Amuse yourself with Milady, my dear d’Artagnan; I wish you may with all
my heart, if that will amuse you.”

“Hear me, Athos,” said d’Artagnan. “Instead of shutting yourself up here
as if you were under arrest, get on horseback and come and take a ride
with me to St. Germain.”

“My dear fellow,” said Athos, “I ride horses when I have any; when I
have none, I go afoot.”

“Well,” said d’Artagnan, smiling at the misanthropy of Athos, which from
any other person would have offended him, “I ride what I can get; I am
not so proud as you. So AU REVOIR, dear Athos.”

“AU REVOIR,” said the Musketeer, making a sign to Grimaud to uncork the
bottle he had just brought.

D’Artagnan and Planchet mounted, and took the road to St. Germain.

All along the road, what Athos had said respecting Mme. Bonacieux
recurred to the mind of the young man. Although d’Artagnan was not of a
very sentimental character, the mercer’s pretty wife had made a real
impression upon his heart. As he said, he was ready to go to the end of
the world to seek her; but the world, being round, has many ends, so
that he did not know which way to turn. Meantime, he was going to try to
find out Milady. Milady had spoken to the man in the black cloak;
therefore she knew him. Now, in the opinion of d’Artagnan, it was
certainly the man in the black cloak who had carried off Mme. Bonacieux
the second time, as he had carried her off the first. D’Artagnan then
only half-lied, which is lying but little, when he said that by going in
search of Milady he at the same time went in search of Constance.

Thinking of all this, and from time to time giving a touch of the spur
to his horse, d’Artagnan completed his short journey, and arrived at St.
Germain. He had just passed by the pavilion in which ten years later
Louis XIV was born. He rode up a very quiet street, looking to the right
and the left to see if he could catch any vestige of his beautiful
Englishwoman, when from the ground floor of a pretty house, which,
according to the fashion of the time, had no window toward the street,
he saw a face peep out with which he thought he was acquainted. This
person walked along the terrace, which was ornamented with flowers.
Planchet recognized him first.

“Eh, monsieur!” said he, addressing d’Artagnan, “don’t you remember that
face which is blinking yonder?”

“No,” said d’Artagnan, “and yet I am certain it is not the first time I
have seen that visage.”

“PARBLEU, I believe it is not,” said Planchet. “Why, it is poor Lubin,
the lackey of the Comte de Wardes--he whom you took such good care of a
month ago at Calais, on the road to the governor’s country house!”

“So it is!” said d’Artagnan; “I know him now. Do you think he would
recollect you?”

“My faith, monsieur, he was in such trouble that I doubt if he can have
retained a very clear recollection of me.”

“Well, go and talk with the boy,” said d’Artagnan, “and make out if you
can from his conversation whether his master is dead.”

Planchet dismounted and went straight up to Lubin, who did not at all
remember him, and the two lackeys began to chat with the best
understanding possible; while d’Artagnan turned the two horses into a
lane, went round the house, and came back to watch the conference from
behind a hedge of filberts.

At the end of an instant’s observation he heard the noise of a vehicle,
and saw Milady’s carriage stop opposite to him. He could not be
mistaken; Milady was in it. D’Artagnan leaned upon the neck of his
horse, in order that he might see without being seen.

Milady put her charming blond head out at the window, and gave her
orders to her maid.

The latter--a pretty girl of about twenty or twenty-two years, active
and lively, the true SOUBRETTE of a great lady--jumped from the step
upon which, according to the custom of the time, she was seated, and
took her way toward the terrace upon which d’Artagnan had perceived
Lubin.

D’Artagnan followed the soubrette with his eyes, and saw her go toward
the terrace; but it happened that someone in the house called Lubin, so
that Planchet remained alone, looking in all directions for the road
where d’Artagnan had disappeared.

The maid approached Planchet, whom she took for Lubin, and holding out a
little billet to him said, “For your master.”

“For my master?” replied Planchet, astonished.

“Yes, and important. Take it quickly.”

Thereupon she ran toward the carriage, which had turned round toward the
way it came, jumped upon the step, and the carriage drove off.

Planchet turned and returned the billet. Then, accustomed to passive
obedience, he jumped down from the terrace, ran toward the lane, and at
the end of twenty paces met d’Artagnan, who, having seen all, was coming
to him.

“For you, monsieur,” said Planchet, presenting the billet to the young
man.

“For me?” said d’Artagnan; “are you sure of that?”

“PARDIEU, monsieur, I can’t be more sure. The SOUBRETTE said, ‘For your
master.’ I have no other master but you; so--a pretty little lass, my
faith, is that SOUBRETTE!”

D’Artagnan opened the letter, and read these words:

“A person who takes more interest in you than she is willing to confess
wishes to know on what day it will suit you to walk in the forest?
Tomorrow, at the Hotel Field of the Cloth of Gold, a lackey in black and
red will wait for your reply.”

“Oh!” said d’Artagnan, “this is rather warm; it appears that Milady and
I are anxious about the health of the same person. Well, Planchet, how
is the good Monsieur de Wardes? He is not dead, then?”

“No, monsieur, he is as well as a man can be with four sword wounds in
his body; for you, without question, inflicted four upon the dear
gentleman, and he is still very weak, having lost almost all his blood.
As I said, monsieur, Lubin did not know me, and told me our adventure
from one end to the other.”

“Well done, Planchet! you are the king of lackeys. Now jump onto your
horse, and let us overtake the carriage.”

This did not take long. At the end of five minutes they perceived the
carriage drawn up by the roadside; a cavalier, richly dressed, was close
to the door.

The conversation between Milady and the cavalier was so animated that
d’Artagnan stopped on the other side of the carriage without anyone but
the pretty SOUBRETTE perceiving his presence.

The conversation took place in English--a language which d’Artagnan
could not understand; but by the accent the young man plainly saw that
the beautiful Englishwoman was in a great rage. She terminated it by an
action which left no doubt as to the nature of this conversation; this
was a blow with her fan, applied with such force that the little
feminine weapon flew into a thousand pieces.

The cavalier laughed aloud, which appeared to exasperate Milady still
more.

D’Artagnan thought this was the moment to interfere. He approached the
other door, and taking off his hat respectfully, said, “Madame, will you
permit me to offer you my services? It appears to me that this cavalier
has made you very angry. Speak one word, madame, and I take upon myself
to punish him for his want of courtesy.”

At the first word Milady turned, looking at the young man with
astonishment; and when he had finished, she said in very good French,
“Monsieur, I should with great confidence place myself under your
protection if the person with whom I quarrel were not my brother.”

“Ah, excuse me, then,” said d’Artagnan. “You must be aware that I was
ignorant of that, madame.”

“What is that stupid fellow troubling himself about?” cried the cavalier
whom Milady had designated as her brother, stooping down to the height
of the coach window. “Why does not he go about his business?”

“Stupid fellow yourself!” said d’Artagnan, stooping in his turn on the
neck of his horse, and answering on his side through the carriage
window. “I do not go on because it pleases me to stop here.”

The cavalier addressed some words in English to his sister.

“I speak to you in French,” said d’Artagnan; “be kind enough, then, to
reply to me in the same language. You are Madame’s brother, I learn--be
it so; but fortunately you are not mine.”

It might be thought that Milady, timid as women are in general, would
have interposed in this commencement of mutual provocations in order to
prevent the quarrel from going too far; but on the contrary, she threw
herself back in her carriage, and called out coolly to the coachman, “Go
on--home!”

The pretty SOUBRETTE cast an anxious glance at d’Artagnan, whose good
looks seemed to have made an impression on her.

The carriage went on, and left the two men facing each other; no
material obstacle separated them.

The cavalier made a movement as if to follow the carriage; but
d’Artagnan, whose anger, already excited, was much increased by
recognizing in him the Englishman of Amiens who had won his horse and
had been very near winning his diamond of Athos, caught at his bridle
and stopped him.

“Well, monsieur,” said he, “you appear to be more stupid than I am, for
you forget there is a little quarrel to arrange between us two.”

“Ah,” said the Englishman, “is it you, my master? It seems you must
always be playing some game or other.”

“Yes; and that reminds me that I have a revenge to take. We will see, my
dear monsieur, if you can handle a sword as skillfully as you can a dice
box.”

“You see plainly that I have no sword,” said the Englishman. “Do you
wish to play the braggart with an unarmed man?”

“I hope you have a sword at home; but at all events, I have two, and if
you like, I will throw with you for one of them.”

“Needless,” said the Englishman; “I am well furnished with such
playthings.”

“Very well, my worthy gentleman,” replied d’Artagnan, “pick out the
longest, and come and show it to me this evening.”

“Where, if you please?”

“Behind the Luxembourg; that’s a charming spot for such amusements as
the one I propose to you.”

“That will do; I will be there.”

“Your hour?”

“Six o’clock.”

“A PROPOS, you have probably one or two friends?”

“I have three, who would be honored by joining in the sport with me.”

“Three? Marvelous! That falls out oddly! Three is just my number!”

“Now, then, who are you?” asked the Englishman.

“I am Monsieur d’Artagnan, a Gascon gentleman, serving in the king’s
Musketeers. And you?”

“I am Lord de Winter, Baron Sheffield.”

“Well, then, I am your servant, Monsieur Baron,” said d’Artagnan,
“though you have names rather difficult to recollect.” And touching his
horse with the spur, he cantered back to Paris. As he was accustomed to
do in all cases of any consequence, d’Artagnan went straight to the
residence of Athos.

He found Athos reclining upon a large sofa, where he was waiting, as he
said, for his outfit to come and find him. He related to Athos all that
had passed, except the letter to M. de Wardes.

Athos was delighted to find he was going to fight an Englishman. We
might say that was his dream.

They immediately sent their lackeys for Porthos and Aramis, and on their
arrival made them acquainted with the situation.

Porthos drew his sword from the scabbard, and made passes at the wall,
springing back from time to time, and making contortions like a dancer.

Aramis, who was constantly at work at his poem, shut himself up in
Athos’s closet, and begged not to be disturbed before the moment of
drawing swords.

Athos, by signs, desired Grimaud to bring another bottle of wine.

D’Artagnan employed himself in arranging a little plan, of which we
shall hereafter see the execution, and which promised him some agreeable
adventure, as might be seen by the smiles which from time to time passed
over his countenance, whose thoughtfulness they animated.




31 ENGLISH AND FRENCH


The hour having come, they went with their four lackeys to a spot behind
the Luxembourg given up to the feeding of goats. Athos threw a piece of
money to the goatkeeper to withdraw. The lackeys were ordered to act as
sentinels.

A silent party soon drew near to the same enclosure, entered, and joined
the Musketeers. Then, according to foreign custom, the presentations
took place.

The Englishmen were all men of rank; consequently the odd names of their
adversaries were for them not only a matter of surprise, but of
annoyance.

“But after all,” said Lord de Winter, when the three friends had been
named, “we do not know who you are. We cannot fight with such names;
they are names of shepherds.”

“Therefore your lordship may suppose they are only assumed names,” said
Athos.

“Which only gives us a greater desire to know the real ones,” replied
the Englishman.

“You played very willingly with us without knowing our names,” said
Athos, “by the same token that you won our horses.”

“That is true, but we then only risked our pistoles; this time we risk
our blood. One plays with anybody; but one fights only with equals.”

“And that is but just,” said Athos, and he took aside the one of the
four Englishmen with whom he was to fight, and communicated his name in
a low voice.

Porthos and Aramis did the same.

“Does that satisfy you?” said Athos to his adversary. “Do you find me of
sufficient rank to do me the honor of crossing swords with me?”

“Yes, monsieur,” said the Englishman, bowing.

“Well! now shall I tell you something?” added Athos, coolly.

“What?” replied the Englishman.

“Why, that is that you would have acted much more wisely if you had not
required me to make myself known.”

“Why so?”

“Because I am believed to be dead, and have reasons for wishing nobody
to know I am living; so that I shall be obliged to kill you to prevent
my secret from roaming over the fields.”

The Englishman looked at Athos, believing that he jested, but Athos did
not jest the least in the world.

“Gentlemen,” said Athos, addressing at the same time his companions and
their adversaries, “are we ready?”

“Yes!” answered the Englishmen and the Frenchmen, as with one voice.

“On guard, then!” cried Athos.

Immediately eight swords glittered in the rays of the setting sun, and
the combat began with an animosity very natural between men twice
enemies.

Athos fenced with as much calmness and method as if he had been
practicing in a fencing school.

Porthos, abated, no doubt, of his too-great confidence by his adventure
of Chantilly, played with skill and prudence. Aramis, who had the third
canto of his poem to finish, behaved like a man in haste.

Athos killed his adversary first. He hit him but once, but as he had
foretold, that hit was a mortal one; the sword pierced his heart.

Second, Porthos stretched his upon the grass with a wound through his
thigh, As the Englishman, without making any further resistance, then
surrendered his sword, Porthos took him up in his arms and bore him to
his carriage.

Aramis pushed his so vigorously that after going back fifty paces, the
man ended by fairly taking to his heels, and disappeared amid the
hooting of the lackeys.

As to d’Artagnan, he fought purely and simply on the defensive; and when
he saw his adversary pretty well fatigued, with a vigorous side thrust
sent his sword flying. The baron, finding himself disarmed, took two or
three steps back, but in this movement his foot slipped and he fell
backward.

D’Artagnan was over him at a bound, and said to the Englishman, pointing
his sword to his throat, “I could kill you, my Lord, you are completely
in my hands; but I spare your life for the sake of your sister.”

D’Artagnan was at the height of joy; he had realized the plan he had
imagined beforehand, whose picturing had produced the smiles we noted
upon his face.

The Englishman, delighted at having to do with a gentleman of such a
kind disposition, pressed d’Artagnan in his arms, and paid a thousand
compliments to the three Musketeers, and as Porthos’s adversary was
already installed in the carriage, and as Aramis’s had taken to his
heels, they had nothing to think about but the dead.

As Porthos and Aramis were undressing him, in the hope of finding his
wound not mortal, a large purse dropped from his clothes. D’Artagnan
picked it up and offered it to Lord de Winter.

“What the devil would you have me do with that?” said the Englishman.

“You can restore it to his family,” said d’Artagnan.

“His family will care much about such a trifle as that! His family will
inherit fifteen thousand louis a year from him. Keep the purse for your
lackeys.”

D’Artagnan put the purse into his pocket.

“And now, my young friend, for you will permit me, I hope, to give you
that name,” said Lord de Winter, “on this very evening, if agreeable to
you, I will present you to my sister, Milady Clarik, for I am desirous
that she should take you into her good graces; and as she is not in bad
odor at court, she may perhaps on some future day speak a word that will
not prove useless to you.”

D’Artagnan blushed with pleasure, and bowed a sign of assent.

At this time Athos came up to d’Artagnan.

“What do you mean to do with that purse?” whispered he.

“Why, I meant to pass it over to you, my dear Athos.”

“Me! why to me?”

“Why, you killed him! They are the spoils of victory.”

“I, the heir of an enemy!” said Athos; “for whom, then, do you take me?”

“It is the custom in war,” said d’Artagnan, “why should it not be the
custom in a duel?”

“Even on the field of battle, I have never done that.”

Porthos shrugged his shoulders; Aramis by a movement of his lips
endorsed Athos.

“Then,” said d’Artagnan, “let us give the money to the lackeys, as Lord
de Winter desired us to do.”

“Yes,” said Athos; “let us give the money to the lackeys--not to our
lackeys, but to the lackeys of the Englishmen.”

Athos took the purse, and threw it into the hand of the coachman. “For
you and your comrades.”

This greatness of spirit in a man who was quite destitute struck even
Porthos; and this French generosity, repeated by Lord de Winter and his
friend, was highly applauded, except by MM Grimaud, Bazin, Mousqueton
and Planchet.

Lord de Winter, on quitting d’Artagnan, gave him his sister’s address.
She lived in the Place Royale--then the fashionable quarter--at Number
6, and he undertook to call and take d’Artagnan with him in order to
introduce him. D’Artagnan appointed eight o’clock at Athos’s residence.

This introduction to Milady Clarik occupied the head of our Gascon
greatly. He remembered in what a strange manner this woman had hitherto
been mixed up in his destiny. According to his conviction, she was some
creature of the cardinal, and yet he felt himself invincibly drawn
toward her by one of those sentiments for which we cannot account. His
only fear was that Milady would recognize in him the man of Meung and of
Dover. Then she knew that he was one of the friends of M. de Treville,
and consequently, that he belonged body and soul to the king; which
would make him lose a part of his advantage, since when known to Milady
as he knew her, he played only an equal game with her. As to the
commencement of an intrigue between her and M. de Wardes, our
presumptuous hero gave but little heed to that, although the marquis was
young, handsome, rich, and high in the cardinal’s favor. It is not for
nothing we are but twenty years old, above all if we were born at
Tarbes.

D’Artagnan began by making his most splendid toilet, then returned to
Athos’s, and according to custom, related everything to him. Athos
listened to his projects, then shook his head, and recommended prudence
to him with a shade of bitterness.

“What!” said he, “you have just lost one woman, whom you call good,
charming, perfect; and here you are, running headlong after another.”

D’Artagnan felt the truth of this reproach.

“I loved Madame Bonacieux with my heart, while I only love Milady with
my head,” said he. “In getting introduced to her, my principal object is
to ascertain what part she plays at court.”

“The part she plays, PARDIEU! It is not difficult to divine that, after
all you have told me. She is some emissary of the cardinal; a woman who
will draw you into a snare in which you will leave your head.”

“The devil! my dear Athos, you view things on the dark side, methinks.”

“My dear fellow, I mistrust women. Can it be otherwise? I bought my
experience dearly--particularly fair women. Milady is fair, you say?”

“She has the most beautiful light hair imaginable!”

“Ah, my poor d’Artagnan!” said Athos.

“Listen to me! I want to be enlightened on a subject; then, when I shall
have learned what I desire to know, I will withdraw.”

“Be enlightened!” said Athos, phlegmatically.

Lord de Winter arrived at the appointed time; but Athos, being warned of
his coming, went into the other chamber. He therefore found d’Artagnan
alone, and as it was nearly eight o’clock he took the young man with
him.

An elegant carriage waited below, and as it was drawn by two excellent
horses, they were soon at the Place Royale.

Milady Clarik received d’Artagnan ceremoniously. Her hotel was
remarkably sumptuous, and while the most part of the English had quit,
or were about to quit, France on account of the war, Milady had just
been laying out much money upon her residence; which proved that the
general measure which drove the English from France did not affect her.

“You see,” said Lord de Winter, presenting d’Artagnan to his sister, “a
young gentleman who has held my life in his hands, and who has not
abused his advantage, although we have been twice enemies, although it
was I who insulted him, and although I am an Englishman. Thank him,
then, madame, if you have any affection for me.”

Milady frowned slightly; a scarcely visible cloud passed over her brow,
and so peculiar a smile appeared upon her lips that the young man, who
saw and observed this triple shade, almost shuddered at it.

The brother did not perceive this; he had turned round to play with
Milady’s favorite monkey, which had pulled him by the doublet.

“You are welcome, monsieur,” said Milady, in a voice whose singular
sweetness contrasted with the symptoms of ill-humor which d’Artagnan had
just remarked; “you have today acquired eternal rights to my gratitude.”

The Englishman then turned round and described the combat without
omitting a single detail. Milady listened with the greatest attention,
and yet it was easily to be perceived, whatever effort she made to
conceal her impressions, that this recital was not agreeable to her. The
blood rose to her head, and her little foot worked with impatience
beneath her robe.

Lord de Winter perceived nothing of this. When he had finished, he went
to a table upon which was a salver with Spanish wine and glasses. He
filled two glasses, and by a sign invited d’Artagnan to drink.

D’Artagnan knew it was considered disobliging by an Englishman to refuse
to pledge him. He therefore drew near to the table and took the second
glass. He did not, however, lose sight of Milady, and in a mirror he
perceived the change that came over her face. Now that she believed
herself to be no longer observed, a sentiment resembling ferocity
animated her countenance. She bit her handkerchief with her beautiful
teeth.

That pretty little SOUBRETTE whom d’Artagnan had already observed then
came in. She spoke some words to Lord de Winter in English, who
thereupon requested d’Artagnan’s permission to retire, excusing himself
on account of the urgency of the business that had called him away, and
charging his sister to obtain his pardon.

D’Artagnan exchanged a shake of the hand with Lord de Winter, and then
returned to Milady. Her countenance, with surprising mobility, had
recovered its gracious expression; but some little red spots on her
handkerchief indicated that she had bitten her lips till the blood came.
Those lips were magnificent; they might be said to be of coral.

The conversation took a cheerful turn. Milady appeared to have entirely
recovered. She told d’Artagnan that Lord de Winter was her
brother-in-law, and not her brother. She had married a younger brother
of the family, who had left her a widow with one child. This child was
the only heir to Lord de Winter, if Lord de Winter did not marry. All
this showed d’Artagnan that there was a veil which concealed something;
but he could not yet see under this veil.

In addition to this, after a half hour’s conversation d’Artagnan was
convinced that Milady was his compatriot; she spoke French with an
elegance and a purity that left no doubt on that head.

D’Artagnan was profuse in gallant speeches and protestations of
devotion. To all the simple things which escaped our Gascon, Milady
replied with a smile of kindness. The hour came for him to retire.
D’Artagnan took leave of Milady, and left the saloon the happiest of
men.

On the staircase he met the pretty SOUBRETTE, who brushed gently against
him as she passed, and then, blushing to the eyes, asked his pardon for
having touched him in a voice so sweet that the pardon was granted
instantly.

D’Artagnan came again on the morrow, and was still better received than
on the evening before. Lord de Winter was not at home; and it was Milady
who this time did all the honors of the evening. She appeared to take a
great interest in him, asked him whence he came, who were his friends,
and whether he had not sometimes thought of attaching himself to the
cardinal.

D’Artagnan, who, as we have said, was exceedingly prudent for a young
man of twenty, then remembered his suspicions regarding Milady. He
launched into a eulogy of his Eminence, and said that he should not have
failed to enter into the Guards of the cardinal instead of the king’s
Guards if he had happened to know M. de Cavois instead of M. de
Treville.

Milady changed the conversation without any appearance of affectation,
and asked d’Artagnan in the most careless manner possible if he had ever
been in England.

D’Artagnan replied that he had been sent thither by M. de Treville to
treat for a supply of horses, and that he had brought back four as
specimens.

Milady in the course of the conversation twice or thrice bit her lips;
she had to deal with a Gascon who played close.

At the same hour as on the preceding evening, d’Artagnan retired. In the
corridor he again met the pretty Kitty; that was the name of the
SOUBRETTE. She looked at him with an expression of kindness which it was
impossible to mistake; but d’Artagnan was so preoccupied by the mistress
that he noticed absolutely nothing but her.

D’Artagnan came again on the morrow and the day after that, and each day
Milady gave him a more gracious reception.

Every evening, either in the antechamber, the corridor, or on the
stairs, he met the pretty SOUBRETTE. But, as we have said, d’Artagnan
paid no attention to this persistence of poor Kitty.




32 A PROCURATOR’S DINNER


However brilliant had been the part played by Porthos in the duel, it
had not made him forget the dinner of the procurator’s wife.

On the morrow he received the last touches of Mousqueton’s brush for an
hour, and took his way toward the Rue aux Ours with the steps of a man
who was doubly in favor with fortune.

His heart beat, but not like d’Artagnan’s with a young and impatient
love. No; a more material interest stirred his blood. He was about at
last to pass that mysterious threshold, to climb those unknown stairs by
which, one by one, the old crowns of M. Coquenard had ascended. He was
about to see in reality a certain coffer of which he had twenty times
beheld the image in his dreams--a coffer long and deep, locked, bolted,
fastened in the wall; a coffer of which he had so often heard, and which
the hands--a little wrinkled, it is true, but still not without
elegance--of the procurator’s wife were about to open to his admiring
looks.

And then he--a wanderer on the earth, a man without fortune, a man
without family, a soldier accustomed to inns, cabarets, taverns, and
restaurants, a lover of wine forced to depend upon chance treats--was
about to partake of family meals, to enjoy the pleasures of a
comfortable establishment, and to give himself up to those little
attentions which “the harder one is, the more they please,” as old
soldiers say.

To come in the capacity of a cousin, and seat himself every day at a
good table; to smooth the yellow, wrinkled brow of the old procurator;
to pluck the clerks a little by teaching them BASSETTE, PASSE-DIX, and
LANSQUENET, in their utmost nicety, and winning from them, by way of fee
for the lesson he would give them in an hour, their savings of a
month--all this was enormously delightful to Porthos.

The Musketeer could not forget the evil reports which then prevailed,
and which indeed have survived them, of the procurators of the
period--meanness, stinginess, fasts; but as, after all, excepting some
few acts of economy which Porthos had always found very unseasonable,
the procurator’s wife had been tolerably liberal--that is, be it
understood, for a procurator’s wife--he hoped to see a household of a
highly comfortable kind.

And yet, at the very door the Musketeer began to entertain some doubts.
The approach was not such as to prepossess people--an ill-smelling, dark
passage, a staircase half-lighted by bars through which stole a glimmer
from a neighboring yard; on the first floor a low door studded with
enormous nails, like the principal gate of the Grand Chatelet.

Porthos knocked with his hand. A tall, pale clerk, his face shaded by a
forest of virgin hair, opened the door, and bowed with the air of a man
forced at once to respect in another lofty stature, which indicated
strength, the military dress, which indicated rank, and a ruddy
countenance, which indicated familiarity with good living.

A shorter clerk came behind the first, a taller clerk behind the second,
a stripling of a dozen years rising behind the third. In all, three
clerks and a half, which, for the time, argued a very extensive
clientage.

Although the Musketeer was not expected before one o’clock, the
procurator’s wife had been on the watch ever since midday, reckoning
that the heart, or perhaps the stomach, of her lover would bring him
before his time.

Mme. Coquenard therefore entered the office from the house at the same
moment her guest entered from the stairs, and the appearance of the
worthy lady relieved him from an awkward embarrassment. The clerks
surveyed him with great curiosity, and he, not knowing well what to say
to this ascending and descending scale, remained tongue-tied.

“It is my cousin!” cried the procurator’s wife. “Come in, come in,
Monsieur Porthos!”

The name of Porthos produced its effect upon the clerks, who began to
laugh; but Porthos turned sharply round, and every countenance quickly
recovered its gravity.

They reached the office of the procurator after having passed through
the antechamber in which the clerks were, and the study in which they
ought to have been. This last apartment was a sort of dark room,
littered with papers. On quitting the study they left the kitchen on the
right, and entered the reception room.

All these rooms, which communicated with one another, did not inspire
Porthos favorably. Words might be heard at a distance through all these
open doors. Then, while passing, he had cast a rapid, investigating
glance into the kitchen; and he was obliged to confess to himself, to
the shame of the procurator’s wife and his own regret, that he did not
see that fire, that animation, that bustle, which when a good repast is
on foot prevails generally in that sanctuary of good living.

The procurator had without doubt been warned of his visit, as he
expressed no surprise at the sight of Porthos, who advanced toward him
with a sufficiently easy air, and saluted him courteously.

“We are cousins, it appears, Monsieur Porthos?” said the procurator,
rising, yet supporting his weight upon the arms of his cane chair.

The old man, wrapped in a large black doublet, in which the whole of his
slender body was concealed, was brisk and dry. His little gray eyes
shone like carbuncles, and appeared, with his grinning mouth, to be the
only part of his face in which life survived. Unfortunately the legs
began to refuse their service to this bony machine. During the last five
or six months that this weakness had been felt, the worthy procurator
had nearly become the slave of his wife.

The cousin was received with resignation, that was all. M. Coquenard,
firm upon his legs, would have declined all relationship with M.
Porthos.

“Yes, monsieur, we are cousins,” said Porthos, without being
disconcerted, as he had never reckoned upon being received
enthusiastically by the husband.

“By the female side, I believe?” said the procurator, maliciously.

Porthos did not feel the ridicule of this, and took it for a piece of
simplicity, at which he laughed in his large mustache. Mme. Coquenard,
who knew that a simple-minded procurator was a very rare variety in the
species, smiled a little, and colored a great deal.

M Coquenard had, since the arrival of Porthos, frequently cast his eyes
with great uneasiness upon a large chest placed in front of his oak
desk. Porthos comprehended that this chest, although it did not
correspond in shape with that which he had seen in his dreams, must be
the blessed coffer, and he congratulated himself that the reality was
several feet higher than the dream.

M Coquenard did not carry his genealogical investigations any further;
but withdrawing his anxious look from the chest and fixing it upon
Porthos, he contented himself with saying, “Monsieur our cousin will do
us the favor of dining with us once before his departure for the
campaign, will he not, Madame Coquenard?”

This time Porthos received the blow right in his stomach, and felt it.
It appeared likewise that Mme. Coquenard was not less affected by it on
her part, for she added, “My cousin will not return if he finds that we
do not treat him kindly; but otherwise he has so little time to pass in
Paris, and consequently to spare to us, that we must entreat him to give
us every instant he can call his own previous to his departure.”

“Oh, my legs, my poor legs! where are you?” murmured Coquenard, and he
tried to smile.

This succor, which came to Porthos at the moment in which he was
attacked in his gastronomic hopes, inspired much gratitude in the
Musketeer toward the procurator’s wife.

The hour of dinner soon arrived. They passed into the eating room--a
large dark room situated opposite the kitchen.

The clerks, who, as it appeared, had smelled unusual perfumes in the
house, were of military punctuality, and held their stools in hand quite
ready to sit down. Their jaws moved preliminarily with fearful
threatenings.

“Indeed!” thought Porthos, casting a glance at the three hungry
clerks--for the errand boy, as might be expected, was not admitted to
the honors of the magisterial table, “in my cousin’s place, I would not
keep such gourmands! They look like shipwrecked sailors who have not
eaten for six weeks.”

M Coquenard entered, pushed along upon his armchair with casters by Mme.
Coquenard, whom Porthos assisted in rolling her husband up to the table.
He had scarcely entered when he began to agitate his nose and his jaws
after the example of his clerks.

“Oh, oh!” said he; “here is a soup which is rather inviting.”

“What the devil can they smell so extraordinary in this soup?” said
Porthos, at the sight of a pale liquid, abundant but entirely free from
meat, on the surface of which a few crusts swam about as rare as the
islands of an archipelago.

Mme. Coquenard smiled, and upon a sign from her everyone eagerly took
his seat.

M Coquenard was served first, then Porthos. Afterward Mme. Coquenard
filled her own plate, and distributed the crusts without soup to the
impatient clerks. At this moment the door of the dining room unclosed
with a creak, and Porthos perceived through the half-open flap the
little clerk who, not being allowed to take part in the feast, ate his
dry bread in the passage with the double odor of the dining room and
kitchen.

After the soup the maid brought a boiled fowl--a piece of magnificence
which caused the eyes of the diners to dilate in such a manner that they
seemed ready to burst.

“One may see that you love your family, Madame Coquenard,” said the
procurator, with a smile that was almost tragic. “You are certainly
treating your cousin very handsomely!”

The poor fowl was thin, and covered with one of those thick, bristly
skins through which the teeth cannot penetrate with all their efforts.
The fowl must have been sought for a long time on the perch, to which it
had retired to die of old age.

“The devil!” thought Porthos, “this is poor work. I respect old age, but
I don’t much like it boiled or roasted.”

And he looked round to see if anybody partook of his opinion; but on the
contrary, he saw nothing but eager eyes which were devouring, in
anticipation, that sublime fowl which was the object of his contempt.

Mme. Coquenard drew the dish toward her, skillfully detached the two
great black feet, which she placed upon her husband’s plate, cut off the
neck, which with the head she put on one side for herself, raised the
wing for Porthos, and then returned the bird otherwise intact to the
servant who had brought it in, who disappeared with it before the
Musketeer had time to examine the variations which disappointment
produces upon faces, according to the characters and temperaments of
those who experience it.

In the place of the fowl a dish of haricot beans made its appearance--an
enormous dish in which some bones of mutton that at first sight one
might have believed to have some meat on them pretended to show
themselves.

But the clerks were not the dupes of this deceit, and their lugubrious
looks settled down into resigned countenances.

Mme. Coquenard distributed this dish to the young men with the
moderation of a good housewife.

The time for wine came. M. Coquenard poured from a very small stone
bottle the third of a glass for each of the young men, served himself in
about the same proportion, and passed the bottle to Porthos and Mme.
Coquenard.

The young men filled up their third of a glass with water; then, when
they had drunk half the glass, they filled it up again, and continued to
do so. This brought them, by the end of the repast, to swallowing a
drink which from the color of the ruby had passed to that of a pale
topaz.

Porthos ate his wing of the fowl timidly, and shuddered when he felt the
knee of the procurator’s wife under the table, as it came in search of
his. He also drank half a glass of this sparingly served wine, and found
it to be nothing but that horrible Montreuil--the terror of all expert
palates.

M Coquenard saw him swallowing this wine undiluted, and sighed deeply.

“Will you eat any of these beans, Cousin Porthos?” said Mme. Coquenard,
in that tone which says, “Take my advice, don’t touch them.”

“Devil take me if I taste one of them!” murmured Porthos to himself, and
then said aloud, “Thank you, my cousin, I am no longer hungry.”

There was silence. Porthos could hardly keep his countenance.

The procurator repeated several times, “Ah, Madame Coquenard! Accept my
compliments; your dinner has been a real feast. Lord, how I have eaten!”

M Coquenard had eaten his soup, the black feet of the fowl, and the only
mutton bone on which there was the least appearance of meat.

Porthos fancied they were mystifying him, and began to curl his mustache
and knit his eyebrows; but the knee of Mme. Coquenard gently advised him
to be patient.

This silence and this interruption in serving, which were unintelligible
to Porthos, had, on the contrary, a terrible meaning for the clerks.
Upon a look from the procurator, accompanied by a smile from Mme.
Coquenard, they arose slowly from the table, folded their napkins more
slowly still, bowed, and retired.

“Go, young men! go and promote digestion by working,” said the
procurator, gravely.

The clerks gone, Mme. Coquenard rose and took from a buffet a piece of
cheese, some preserved quinces, and a cake which she had herself made of
almonds and honey.

M Coquenard knit his eyebrows because there were too many good things.
Porthos bit his lips because he saw not the wherewithal to dine. He
looked to see if the dish of beans was still there; the dish of beans
had disappeared.

“A positive feast!” cried M. Coquenard, turning about in his chair, “a
real feast, EPULCE EPULORUM. Lucullus dines with Lucullus.”

Porthos looked at the bottle, which was near him, and hoped that with
wine, bread, and cheese, he might make a dinner; but wine was wanting,
the bottle was empty. M. and Mme. Coquenard did not seem to observe it.

“This is fine!” said Porthos to himself; “I am prettily caught!”

He passed his tongue over a spoonful of preserves, and stuck his teeth
into the sticky pastry of Mme. Coquenard.

“Now,” said he, “the sacrifice is consummated! Ah! if I had not the hope
of peeping with Madame Coquenard into her husband’s chest!”

M Coquenard, after the luxuries of such a repast, which he called an
excess, felt the want of a siesta. Porthos began to hope that the thing
would take place at the present sitting, and in that same locality; but
the procurator would listen to nothing, he would be taken to his room,
and was not satisfied till he was close to his chest, upon the edge of
which, for still greater precaution, he placed his feet.

The procurator’s wife took Porthos into an adjoining room, and they
began to lay the basis of a reconciliation.

“You can come and dine three times a week,” said Mme. Coquenard.

“Thanks, madame!” said Porthos, “but I don’t like to abuse your
kindness; besides, I must think of my outfit!”

“That’s true,” said the procurator’s wife, groaning, “that unfortunate
outfit!”

“Alas, yes,” said Porthos, “it is so.”

“But of what, then, does the equipment of your company consist, Monsieur
Porthos?”

“Oh, of many things!” said Porthos. “The Musketeers are, as you know,
picked soldiers, and they require many things useless to the Guardsmen
or the Swiss.”

“But yet, detail them to me.”

“Why, they may amount to--“, said Porthos, who preferred discussing the
total to taking them one by one.

The procurator’s wife waited tremblingly.

“To how much?” said she. “I hope it does not exceed--” She stopped;
speech failed her.

“Oh, no,” said Porthos, “it does not exceed two thousand five hundred
livres! I even think that with economy I could manage it with two
thousand livres.”

“Good God!” cried she, “two thousand livres! Why, that is a fortune!”

Porthos made a most significant grimace; Mme. Coquenard understood it.

“I wished to know the detail,” said she, “because, having many relatives
in business, I was almost sure of obtaining things at a hundred per cent
less than you would pay yourself.”

“Ah, ah!” said Porthos, “that is what you meant to say!”

“Yes, dear Monsieur Porthos. Thus, for instance, don’t you in the first
place want a horse?”

“Yes, a horse.”

“Well, then! I can just suit you.”

“Ah!” said Porthos, brightening, “that’s well as regards my horse; but I
must have the appointments complete, as they include objects which a
Musketeer alone can purchase, and which will not amount, besides, to
more than three hundred livres.”

“Three hundred livres? Then put down three hundred livres,” said the
procurator’s wife, with a sigh.

Porthos smiled. It may be remembered that he had the saddle which came
from Buckingham. These three hundred livres he reckoned upon putting
snugly into his pocket.

“Then,” continued he, “there is a horse for my lackey, and my valise. As
to my arms, it is useless to trouble you about them; I have them.”

“A horse for your lackey?” resumed the procurator’s wife, hesitatingly;
“but that is doing things in lordly style, my friend.”

“Ah, madame!” said Porthos, haughtily; “do you take me for a beggar?”

“No; I only thought that a pretty mule makes sometimes as good an
appearance as a horse, and it seemed to me that by getting a pretty mule
for Mousqueton--”

“Well, agreed for a pretty mule,” said Porthos; “you are right, I have
seen very great Spanish nobles whose whole suite were mounted on mules.
But then you understand, Madame Coquenard, a mule with feathers and
bells.”

“Be satisfied,” said the procurator’s wife.

“There remains the valise,” added Porthos.

“Oh, don’t let that disturb you,” cried Mme. Coquenard. “My husband has
five or six valises; you shall choose the best. There is one in
particular which he prefers in his journeys, large enough to hold all
the world.”

“Your valise is then empty?” asked Porthos, with simplicity.

“Certainly it is empty,” replied the procurator’s wife, in real
innocence.

“Ah, but the valise I want,” cried Porthos, “is a well-filled one, my
dear.”

Madame uttered fresh sighs. Moliere had not written his scene in
“L’Avare” then. Mme. Coquenard was in the dilemma of Harpagan.

Finally, the rest of the equipment was successively debated in the same
manner; and the result of the sitting was that the procurator’s wife
should give eight hundred livres in money, and should furnish the horse
and the mule which should have the honor of carrying Porthos and
Mousqueton to glory.

These conditions being agreed to, Porthos took leave of Mme. Coquenard.
The latter wished to detain him by darting certain tender glances; but
Porthos urged the commands of duty, and the procurator’s wife was
obliged to give place to the king.

The Musketeer returned home hungry and in bad humor.




33 SOUBRETTE AND MISTRESS


Meantime, as we have said, despite the cries of his conscience and the
wise counsels of Athos, d’Artagnan became hourly more in love with
Milady. Thus he never failed to pay his diurnal court to her; and the
self-satisfied Gascon was convinced that sooner or later she could not
fail to respond.

One day, when he arrived with his head in the air, and as light at heart
as a man who awaits a shower of gold, he found the SOUBRETTE under the
gateway of the hotel; but this time the pretty Kitty was not contented
with touching him as he passed, she took him gently by the hand.

“Good!” thought d’Artagnan, “She is charged with some message for me
from her mistress; she is about to appoint some rendezvous of which she
had not courage to speak.” And he looked down at the pretty girl with
the most triumphant air imaginable.

“I wish to say three words to you, Monsieur Chevalier,” stammered the
SOUBRETTE.

“Speak, my child, speak,” said d’Artagnan; “I listen.”

“Here? Impossible! That which I have to say is too long, and above all,
too secret.”

“Well, what is to be done?”

“If Monsieur Chevalier would follow me?” said Kitty, timidly.

“Where you please, my dear child.”

“Come, then.”

And Kitty, who had not let go the hand of d’Artagnan, led him up a
little dark, winding staircase, and after ascending about fifteen steps,
opened a door.

“Come in here, Monsieur Chevalier,” said she; “here we shall be alone,
and can talk.”

“And whose room is this, my dear child?”

“It is mine, Monsieur Chevalier; it communicates with my mistress’s by
that door. But you need not fear. She will not hear what we say; she
never goes to bed before midnight.”

D’Artagnan cast a glance around him. The little apartment was charming
for its taste and neatness; but in spite of himself, his eyes were
directed to that door which Kitty said led to Milady’s chamber.

Kitty guessed what was passing in the mind of the young man, and heaved
a deep sigh.

“You love my mistress, then, very dearly, Monsieur Chevalier?” said she.

“Oh, more than I can say, Kitty! I am mad for her!”

Kitty breathed a second sigh.

“Alas, monsieur,” said she, “that is too bad.”

“What the devil do you see so bad in it?” said d’Artagnan.

“Because, monsieur,” replied Kitty, “my mistress loves you not at all.”

“HEIN!” said d’Artagnan, “can she have charged you to tell me so?”

“Oh, no, monsieur; but out of the regard I have for you, I have taken
the resolution to tell you so.”

“Much obliged, my dear Kitty; but for the intention only--for the
information, you must agree, is not likely to be at all agreeable.”

“That is to say, you don’t believe what I have told you; is it not so?”

“We have always some difficulty in believing such things, my pretty
dear, were it only from self-love.”

“Then you don’t believe me?”

“I confess that unless you deign to give me some proof of what you
advance--”

“What do you think of this?”

Kitty drew a little note from her bosom.

“For me?” said d’Artagnan, seizing the letter.

“No; for another.”

“For another?”

“Yes.”

“His name; his name!” cried d’Artagnan.

“Read the address.”

“Monsieur El Comte de Wardes.”

The remembrance of the scene at St. Germain presented itself to the mind
of the presumptuous Gascon. As quick as thought, he tore open the
letter, in spite of the cry which Kitty uttered on seeing what he was
going to do, or rather, what he was doing.

“Oh, good Lord, Monsieur Chevalier,” said she, “what are you doing?”

“I?” said d’Artagnan; “nothing,” and he read,

“You have not answered my first note. Are you indisposed, or have you
forgotten the glances you favored me with at the ball of Mme. de Guise?
You have an opportunity now, Count; do not allow it to escape.”

d’Artagnan became very pale; he was wounded in his SELF-love: he thought
that it was in his LOVE.

“Poor dear Monsieur d’Artagnan,” said Kitty, in a voice full of
compassion, and pressing anew the young man’s hand.

“You pity me, little one?” said d’Artagnan.

“Oh, yes, and with all my heart; for I know what it is to be in love.”

“You know what it is to be in love?” said d’Artagnan, looking at her for
the first time with much attention.

“Alas, yes.”

“Well, then, instead of pitying me, you would do much better to assist
me in avenging myself on your mistress.”

“And what sort of revenge would you take?”

“I would triumph over her, and supplant my rival.”

“I will never help you in that, Monsieur Chevalier,” said Kitty, warmly.

“And why not?” demanded d’Artagnan.

“For two reasons.”

“What ones?”

“The first is that my mistress will never love you.”

“How do you know that?”

“You have cut her to the heart.”

“I? In what can I have offended her--I who ever since I have known her
have lived at her feet like a slave? Speak, I beg you!”

“I will never confess that but to the man--who should read to the bottom
of my soul!”

D’Artagnan looked at Kitty for the second time. The young girl had
freshness and beauty which many duchesses would have purchased with
their coronets.

“Kitty,” said he, “I will read to the bottom of your soul when-ever you
like; don’t let that disturb you.” And he gave her a kiss at which the
poor girl became as red as a cherry.

“Oh, no,” said Kitty, “it is not me you love! It is my mistress you
love; you told me so just now.”

“And does that hinder you from letting me know the second reason?”

“The second reason, Monsieur the Chevalier,” replied Kitty, emboldened
by the kiss in the first place, and still further by the expression of
the eyes of the young man, “is that in love, everyone for herself!”

Then only d’Artagnan remembered the languishing glances of Kitty, her
constantly meeting him in the antechamber, the corridor, or on the
stairs, those touches of the hand every time she met him, and her deep
sighs; but absorbed by his desire to please the great lady, he had
disdained the soubrette. He whose game is the eagle takes no heed of the
sparrow.

But this time our Gascon saw at a glance all the advantage to be derived
from the love which Kitty had just confessed so innocently, or so
boldly: the interception of letters addressed to the Comte de Wardes,
news on the spot, entrance at all hours into Kitty’s chamber, which was
contiguous to her mistress’s. The perfidious deceiver was, as may
plainly be perceived, already sacrificing, in intention, the poor girl
in order to obtain Milady, willy-nilly.

“Well,” said he to the young girl, “are you willing, my dear Kitty, that
I should give you a proof of that love which you doubt?”

“What love?” asked the young girl.

“Of that which I am ready to feel toward you.”

“And what is that proof?”

“Are you willing that I should this evening pass with you the time I
generally spend with your mistress?”

“Oh, yes,” said Kitty, clapping her hands, “very willing.”

“Well, then, come here, my dear,” said d’Artagnan, establishing himself
in an easy chair; “come, and let me tell you that you are the prettiest
SOUBRETTE I ever saw!”

And he did tell her so much, and so well, that the poor girl, who asked
nothing better than to believe him, did believe him. Nevertheless, to
d’Artagnan’s great astonishment, the pretty Kitty defended herself
resolutely.

Time passes quickly when it is passed in attacks and defenses. Midnight
sounded, and almost at the same time the bell was rung in Milady’s
chamber.

“Good God,” cried Kitty, “there is my mistress calling me! Go; go
directly!”

D’Artagnan rose, took his hat, as if it had been his intention to obey,
then, opening quickly the door of a large closet instead of that leading
to the staircase, he buried himself amid the robes and dressing gowns of
Milady.

“What are you doing?” cried Kitty.

D’Artagnan, who had secured the key, shut himself up in the closet
without reply.

“Well,” cried Milady, in a sharp voice. “Are you asleep, that you don’t
answer when I ring?”

And d’Artagnan heard the door of communication opened violently.

“Here am I, Milady, here am I!” cried Kitty, springing forward to meet
her mistress.

Both went into the bedroom, and as the door of communication remained
open, d’Artagnan could hear Milady for some time scolding her maid. She
was at length appeased, and the conversation turned upon him while Kitty
was assisting her mistress.

“Well,” said Milady, “I have not seen our Gascon this evening.”

“What, Milady! has he not come?” said Kitty. “Can he be inconstant
before being happy?”

“Oh, no; he must have been prevented by Monsieur de Treville or Monsieur
Dessessart. I understand my game, Kitty; I have this one safe.”

“What will you do with him, madame?”

“What will I do with him? Be easy, Kitty, there is something between
that man and me that he is quite ignorant of: he nearly made me lose my
credit with his Eminence. Oh, I will be revenged!”

“I believed that Madame loved him.”

“I love him? I detest him! An idiot, who held the life of Lord de Winter
in his hands and did not kill him, by which I missed three hundred
thousand livres’ income.”

“That’s true,” said Kitty; “your son was the only heir of his uncle, and
until his majority you would have had the enjoyment of his fortune.”

D’Artagnan shuddered to the marrow at hearing this suave creature
reproach him, with that sharp voice which she took such pains to conceal
in conversation, for not having killed a man whom he had seen load her
with kindnesses.

“For all this,” continued Milady, “I should long ago have revenged
myself on him if, and I don’t know why, the cardinal had not requested
me to conciliate him.”

“Oh, yes; but Madame has not conciliated that little woman he was so
fond of.”

“What, the mercer’s wife of the Rue des Fossoyeurs? Has he not already
forgotten she ever existed? Fine vengeance that, on my faith!”

A cold sweat broke from d’Artagnan’s brow. Why, this woman was a
monster! He resumed his listening, but unfortunately the toilet was
finished.

“That will do,” said Milady; “go into your own room, and tomorrow
endeavor again to get me an answer to the letter I gave you.”

“For Monsieur de Wardes?” said Kitty.

“To be sure; for Monsieur de Wardes.”

“Now, there is one,” said Kitty, “who appears to me quite a different
sort of a man from that poor Monsieur d’Artagnan.”

“Go to bed, mademoiselle,” said Milady; “I don’t like comments.”

D’Artagnan heard the door close; then the noise of two bolts by which
Milady fastened herself in. On her side, but as softly as possible,
Kitty turned the key of the lock, and then d’Artagnan opened the closet
door.

“Oh, good Lord!” said Kitty, in a low voice, “what is the matter with
you? How pale you are!”

“The abominable creature,” murmured d’Artagnan.

“Silence, silence, begone!” said Kitty. “There is nothing but a wainscot
between my chamber and Milady’s; every word that is uttered in one can
be heard in the other.”

“That’s exactly the reason I won’t go,” said d’Artagnan.

“What!” said Kitty, blushing.

“Or, at least, I will go--later.”

He drew Kitty to him. She had the less motive to resist, resistance
would make so much noise. Therefore Kitty surrendered.

It was a movement of vengeance upon Milady. D’Artagnan believed it right
to say that vengeance is the pleasure of the gods. With a little more
heart, he might have been contented with this new conquest; but the
principal features of his character were ambition and pride. It must,
however, be confessed in his justification that the first use he made of
his influence over Kitty was to try and find out what had become of Mme.
Bonacieux; but the poor girl swore upon the crucifix to d’Artagnan that
she was entirely ignorant on that head, her mistress never admitting her
into half her secrets--only she believed she could say she was not dead.

As to the cause which was near making Milady lose her credit with the
cardinal, Kitty knew nothing about it; but this time d’Artagnan was
better informed than she was. As he had seen Milady on board a vessel at
the moment he was leaving England, he suspected that it was, almost
without a doubt, on account of the diamond studs.

But what was clearest in all this was that the true hatred, the profound
hatred, the inveterate hatred of Milady, was increased by his not having
killed her brother-in-law.

D’Artagnan came the next day to Milady’s, and finding her in a very
ill-humor, had no doubt that it was lack of an answer from M. de Wardes
that provoked her thus. Kitty came in, but Milady was very cross with
her. The poor girl ventured a glance at d’Artagnan which said, “See how
I suffer on your account!”

Toward the end of the evening, however, the beautiful lioness became
milder; she smilingly listened to the soft speeches of d’Artagnan, and
even gave him her hand to kiss.

D’Artagnan departed, scarcely knowing what to think, but as he was a
youth who did not easily lose his head, while continuing to pay his
court to Milady, he had framed a little plan in his mind.

He found Kitty at the gate, and, as on the preceding evening, went up to
her chamber. Kitty had been accused of negligence and severely scolded.
Milady could not at all comprehend the silence of the Comte de Wardes,
and she ordered Kitty to come at nine o’clock in the morning to take a
third letter.

D’Artagnan made Kitty promise to bring him that letter on the following
morning. The poor girl promised all her lover desired; she was mad.

Things passed as on the night before. D’Artagnan concealed himself in
his closet; Milady called, undressed, sent away Kitty, and shut the
door. As the night before, d’Artagnan did not return home till five
o’clock in the morning.

At eleven o’clock Kitty came to him. She held in her hand a fresh billet
from Milady. This time the poor girl did not even argue with d’Artagnan;
she gave it to him at once. She belonged body and soul to her handsome
soldier.

D’Artagnan opened the letter and read as follows:

This is the third time I have written to you to tell you that I love
you. Beware that I do not write to you a fourth time to tell you that I
detest you.

If you repent of the manner in which you have acted toward me, the young
girl who brings you this will tell you how a man of spirit may obtain
his pardon.

d’Artagnan colored and grew pale several times in reading this billet.

“Oh, you love her still,” said Kitty, who had not taken her eyes off the
young man’s countenance for an instant.

“No, Kitty, you are mistaken. I do not love her, but I will avenge
myself for her contempt.”

“Oh, yes, I know what sort of vengeance! You told me that!”

“What matters it to you, Kitty? You know it is you alone whom I love.”

“How can I know that?”

“By the scorn I will throw upon her.”

D’Artagnan took a pen and wrote:

Madame, Until the present moment I could not believe that it was to me
your first two letters were addressed, so unworthy did I feel myself of
such an honor; besides, I was so seriously indisposed that I could not
in any case have replied to them.

But now I am forced to believe in the excess of your kindness, since not
only your letter but your servant assures me that I have the good
fortune to be beloved by you.

She has no occasion to teach me the way in which a man of spirit may
obtain his pardon. I will come and ask mine at eleven o’clock this
evening.

To delay it a single day would be in my eyes now to commit a fresh
offense.

From him whom you have rendered the happiest of men, Comte de Wardes

This note was in the first place a forgery; it was likewise an
indelicacy. It was even, according to our present manners, something
like an infamous action; but at that period people did not manage
affairs as they do today. Besides, d’Artagnan from her own admission
knew Milady culpable of treachery in matters more important, and could
entertain no respect for her. And yet, notwithstanding this want of
respect, he felt an uncontrollable passion for this woman boiling in his
veins--passion drunk with contempt; but passion or thirst, as the reader
pleases.

D’Artagnan’s plan was very simple. By Kitty’s chamber he could gain that
of her mistress. He would take advantage of the first moment of
surprise, shame, and terror, to triumph over her. He might fail, but
something must be left to chance. In eight days the campaign would open,
and he would be compelled to leave Paris; d’Artagnan had no time for a
prolonged love siege.

“There,” said the young man, handing Kitty the letter sealed; “give that
to Milady. It is the count’s reply.”

Poor Kitty became as pale as death; she suspected what the letter
contained.

“Listen, my dear girl,” said d’Artagnan; “you cannot but perceive that
all this must end, some way or other. Milady may discover that you gave
the first billet to my lackey instead of to the count’s; that it is I
who have opened the others which ought to have been opened by de Wardes.
Milady will then turn you out of doors, and you know she is not the
woman to limit her vengeance.”

“Alas!” said Kitty, “for whom have I exposed myself to all that?”

“For me, I well know, my sweet girl,” said d’Artagnan. “But I am
grateful, I swear to you.”

“But what does this note contain?”

“Milady will tell you.”

“Ah, you do not love me!” cried Kitty, “and I am very wretched.”

To this reproach there is always one response which deludes women.
D’Artagnan replied in such a manner that Kitty remained in her great
delusion. Although she cried freely before deciding to transmit the
letter to her mistress, she did at last so decide, which was all
d’Artagnan wished. Finally he promised that he would leave her
mistress’s presence at an early hour that evening, and that when he left
the mistress he would ascend with the maid. This promise completed poor
Kitty’s consolation.




34 IN WHICH THE EQUIPMENT OF ARAMIS AND PORTHOS IS TREATED OF


Since the four friends had been each in search of his equipments, there
had been no fixed meeting between them. They dined apart from one
another, wherever they might happen to be, or rather where they could.
Duty likewise on its part took a portion of that precious time which was
gliding away so rapidly--only they had agreed to meet once a week, about
one o’clock, at the residence of Athos, seeing that he, in agreement
with the vow he had formed, did not pass over the threshold of his door.

This day of reunion was the same day as that on which Kitty came to find
d’Artagnan. Soon as Kitty left him, d’Artagnan directed his steps toward
the Rue Ferou.

He found Athos and Aramis philosophizing. Aramis had some slight
inclination to resume the cassock. Athos, according to his system,
neither encouraged nor dissuaded him. Athos believed that everyone
should be left to his own free will. He never gave advice but when it
was asked, and even then he required to be asked twice.

“People, in general,” he said, “only ask advice not to follow it; or if
they do follow it, it is for the sake of having someone to blame for
having given it.”

Porthos arrived a minute after d’Artagnan. The four friends were
reunited.

The four countenances expressed four different feelings: that of
Porthos, tranquillity; that of d’Artagnan, hope; that of Aramis,
uneasiness; that of Athos, carelessness.

At the end of a moment’s conversation, in which Porthos hinted that a
lady of elevated rank had condescended to relieve him from his
embarrassment, Mousqueton entered. He came to request his master to
return to his lodgings, where his presence was urgent, as he piteously
said.

“Is it my equipment?”

“Yes and no,” replied Mousqueton.

“Well, but can’t you speak?”

“Come, monsieur.”

Porthos rose, saluted his friends, and followed Mousqueton. An instant
after, Bazin made his appearance at the door.

“What do you want with me, my friend?” said Aramis, with that mildness
of language which was observable in him every time that his ideas were
directed toward the Church.

“A man wishes to see Monsieur at home,” replied Bazin.

“A man! What man?”

“A mendicant.”

“Give him alms, Bazin, and bid him pray for a poor sinner.”

“This mendicant insists upon speaking to you, and pretends that you will
be very glad to see him.”

“Has he sent no particular message for me?”

“Yes. If Monsieur Aramis hesitates to come,” he said, “tell him I am
from Tours.”

“From Tours!” cried Aramis. “A thousand pardons, gentlemen; but no doubt
this man brings me the news I expected.” And rising also, he went off at
a quick pace. There remained Athos and d’Artagnan.

“I believe these fellows have managed their business. What do you think,
d’Artagnan?” said Athos.

“I know that Porthos was in a fair way,” replied d’Artagnan; “and as to
Aramis to tell you the truth, I have never been seriously uneasy on his
account. But you, my dear Athos--you, who so generously distributed the
Englishman’s pistoles, which were our legitimate property--what do you
mean to do?”

“I am satisfied with having killed that fellow, my boy, seeing that it
is blessed bread to kill an Englishman; but if I had pocketed his
pistoles, they would have weighed me down like a remorse.”

“Go to, my dear Athos; you have truly inconceivable ideas.”

“Let it pass. What do you think of Monsieur de Treville telling me, when
he did me the honor to call upon me yesterday, that you associated with
the suspected English, whom the cardinal protects?”

“That is to say, I visit an Englishwoman--the one I named.”

“Oh, ay! the fair woman on whose account I gave you advice, which
naturally you took care not to adopt.”

“I gave you my reasons.”

“Yes; you look there for your outfit, I think you said.”

“Not at all. I have acquired certain knowledge that that woman was
concerned in the abduction of Madame Bonacieux.”

“Yes, I understand now: to find one woman, you court another. It is the
longest road, but certainly the most amusing.”

D’Artagnan was on the point of telling Athos all; but one consideration
restrained him. Athos was a gentleman, punctilious in points of honor;
and there were in the plan which our lover had devised for Milady, he
was sure, certain things that would not obtain the assent of this
Puritan. He was therefore silent; and as Athos was the least inquisitive
of any man on earth, d’Artagnan’s confidence stopped there. We will
therefore leave the two friends, who had nothing important to say to
each other, and follow Aramis.

Upon being informed that the person who wanted to speak to him came from
Tours, we have seen with what rapidity the young man followed, or rather
went before, Bazin; he ran without stopping from the Rue Ferou to the
Rue de Vaugirard. On entering he found a man of short stature and
intelligent eyes, but covered with rags.

“You have asked for me?” said the Musketeer.

“I wish to speak with Monsieur Aramis. Is that your name, monsieur?”

“My very own. You have brought me something?”

“Yes, if you show me a certain embroidered handkerchief.”

“Here it is,” said Aramis, taking a small key from his breast and
opening a little ebony box inlaid with mother of pearl, “here it is.
Look.”

“That is right,” replied the mendicant; “dismiss your lackey.”

In fact, Bazin, curious to know what the mendicant could want with his
master, kept pace with him as well as he could, and arrived almost at
the same time he did; but his quickness was not of much use to him. At
the hint from the mendicant his master made him a sign to retire, and he
was obliged to obey.

Bazin gone, the mendicant cast a rapid glance around him in order to be
sure that nobody could either see or hear him, and opening his ragged
vest, badly held together by a leather strap, he began to rip the upper
part of his doublet, from which he drew a letter.

Aramis uttered a cry of joy at the sight of the seal, kissed the
superscription with an almost religious respect, and opened the epistle,
which contained what follows:

“My Friend, it is the will of fate that we should be still for some time
separated; but the delightful days of youth are not lost beyond return.
Perform your duty in camp; I will do mine elsewhere. Accept that which
the bearer brings you; make the campaign like a handsome true gentleman,
and think of me, who kisses tenderly your black eyes.

“Adieu; or rather, AU REVOIR.”

The mendicant continued to rip his garments; and drew from amid his rags
a hundred and fifty Spanish double pistoles, which he laid down on the
table; then he opened the door, bowed, and went out before the young
man, stupefied by his letter, had ventured to address a word to him.

Aramis then reperused the letter, and perceived a postscript:

PS. You may behave politely to the bearer, who is a count and a grandee
of Spain!

“Golden dreams!” cried Aramis. “Oh, beautiful life! Yes, we are young;
yes, we shall yet have happy days! My love, my blood, my life! all, all,
all, are thine, my adored mistress!”

And he kissed the letter with passion, without even vouchsafing a look
at the gold which sparkled on the table.

Bazin scratched at the door, and as Aramis had no longer any reason to
exclude him, he bade him come in.

Bazin was stupefied at the sight of the gold, and forgot that he came to
announce d’Artagnan, who, curious to know who the mendicant could be,
came to Aramis on leaving Athos.

Now, as d’Artagnan used no ceremony with Aramis, seeing that Bazin
forgot to announce him, he announced himself.

“The devil! my dear Aramis,” said d’Artagnan, “if these are the prunes
that are sent to you from Tours, I beg you will make my compliments to
the gardener who gathers them.”

“You are mistaken, friend d’Artagnan,” said Aramis, always on his guard;
“this is from my publisher, who has just sent me the price of that poem
in one-syllable verse which I began yonder.”

“Ah, indeed,” said d’Artagnan. “Well, your publisher is very generous,
my dear Aramis, that’s all I can say.”

“How, monsieur?” cried Bazin, “a poem sell so dear as that! It is
incredible! Oh, monsieur, you can write as much as you like; you may
become equal to Monsieur de Voiture and Monsieur de Benserade. I like
that. A poet is as good as an abbe. Ah! Monsieur Aramis, become a poet,
I beg of you.”

“Bazin, my friend,” said Aramis, “I believe you meddle with my
conversation.”

Bazin perceived he was wrong; he bowed and went out.

“Ah!” said d’Artagnan with a smile, “you sell your productions at their
weight in gold. You are very fortunate, my friend; but take care or you
will lose that letter which is peeping from your doublet, and which also
comes, no doubt, from your publisher.”

Aramis blushed to the eyes, crammed in the letter, and re-buttoned his
doublet.

“My dear d’Artagnan,” said he, “if you please, we will join our friends;
as I am rich, we will today begin to dine together again, expecting that
you will be rich in your turn.”

“My faith!” said d’Artagnan, with great pleasure. “It is long since we
have had a good dinner; and I, for my part, have a somewhat hazardous
expedition for this evening, and shall not be sorry, I confess, to
fortify myself with a few glasses of good old Burgundy.”

“Agreed, as to the old Burgundy; I have no objection to that,” said
Aramis, from whom the letter and the gold had removed, as by magic, his
ideas of conversion.

And having put three or four double pistoles into his pocket to answer
the needs of the moment, he placed the others in the ebony box, inlaid
with mother of pearl, in which was the famous handkerchief which served
him as a talisman.

The two friends repaired to Athos’s, and he, faithful to his vow of not
going out, took upon him to order dinner to be brought to them. As he
was perfectly acquainted with the details of gastronomy, d’Artagnan and
Aramis made no objection to abandoning this important care to him.

They went to find Porthos, and at the corner of the Rue Bac met
Mousqueton, who, with a most pitiable air, was driving before him a mule
and a horse.

D’Artagnan uttered a cry of surprise, which was not quite free from joy.

“Ah, my yellow horse,” cried he. “Aramis, look at that horse!”

“Oh, the frightful brute!” said Aramis.

“Ah, my dear,” replied d’Artagnan, “upon that very horse I came to
Paris.”

“What, does Monsieur know this horse?” said Mousqueton.

“It is of an original color,” said Aramis; “I never saw one with such a
hide in my life.”

“I can well believe it,” replied d’Artagnan, “and that was why I got
three crowns for him. It must have been for his hide, for, CERTES, the
carcass is not worth eighteen livres. But how did this horse come into
your hands, Mousqueton?”

“Pray,” said the lackey, “say nothing about it, monsieur; it is a
frightful trick of the husband of our duchess!”

“How is that, Mousqueton?”

“Why, we are looked upon with a rather favorable eye by a lady of
quality, the Duchesse de--but, your pardon; my master has commanded me
to be discreet. She had forced us to accept a little souvenir, a
magnificent Spanish GENET and an Andalusian mule, which were beautiful
to look upon. The husband heard of the affair; on their way he
confiscated the two magnificent beasts which were being sent to us, and
substituted these horrible animals.”

“Which you are taking back to him?” said d’Artagnan.

“Exactly!” replied Mousqueton. “You may well believe that we will not
accept such steeds as these in exchange for those which had been
promised to us.”

“No, PARDIEU; though I should like to have seen Porthos on my yellow
horse. That would give me an idea of how I looked when I arrived in
Paris. But don’t let us hinder you, Mousqueton; go and perform your
master’s orders. Is he at home?”

“Yes, monsieur,” said Mousqueton, “but in a very ill humor. Get up!”

He continued his way toward the Quai des Grands Augustins, while the two
friends went to ring at the bell of the unfortunate Porthos. He, having
seen them crossing the yard, took care not to answer, and they rang in
vain.

Meanwhile Mousqueton continued on his way, and crossing the Pont Neuf,
still driving the two sorry animals before him, he reached the Rue aux
Ours. Arrived there, he fastened, according to the orders of his master,
both horse and mule to the knocker of the procurator’s door; then,
without taking any thought for their future, he returned to Porthos, and
told him that his commission was completed.

In a short time the two unfortunate beasts, who had not eaten anything
since the morning, made such a noise in raising and letting fall the
knocker that the procurator ordered his errand boy to go and inquire in
the neighborhood to whom this horse and mule belonged.

Mme. Coquenard recognized her present, and could not at first comprehend
this restitution; but the visit of Porthos soon enlightened her. The
anger which fired the eyes of the Musketeer, in spite of his efforts to
suppress it, terrified his sensitive inamorata. In fact, Mousqueton had
not concealed from his master that he had met d’Artagnan and Aramis, and
that d’Artagnan in the yellow horse had recognized the Bearnese pony
upon which he had come to Paris, and which he had sold for three crowns.

Porthos went away after having appointed a meeting with the procurator’s
wife in the cloister of St. Magloire. The procurator, seeing he was
going, invited him to dinner--an invitation which the Musketeer refused
with a majestic air.

Mme. Coquenard repaired trembling to the cloister of St. Magloire, for
she guessed the reproaches that awaited her there; but she was
fascinated by the lofty airs of Porthos.

All that which a man wounded in his self-love could let fall in the
shape of imprecations and reproaches upon the head of a woman Porthos
let fall upon the bowed head of the procurator’s wife.

“Alas,” said she, “I did all for the best! One of our clients is a
horsedealer; he owes money to the office, and is backward in his pay. I
took the mule and the horse for what he owed us; he assured me that they
were two noble steeds.”

“Well, madame,” said Porthos, “if he owed you more than five crowns,
your horsedealer is a thief.”

“There is no harm in trying to buy things cheap, Monsieur Porthos,” said
the procurator’s wife, seeking to excuse herself.

“No, madame; but they who so assiduously try to buy things cheap ought
to permit others to seek more generous friends.” And Porthos, turning on
his heel, made a step to retire.

“Monsieur Porthos! Monsieur Porthos!” cried the procurator’s wife. “I
have been wrong; I see it. I ought not to have driven a bargain when it
was to equip a cavalier like you.”

Porthos, without reply, retreated a second step. The procurator’s wife
fancied she saw him in a brilliant cloud, all surrounded by duchesses
and marchionesses, who cast bags of money at his feet.

“Stop, in the name of heaven, Monsieur Porthos!” cried she. “Stop, and
let us talk.”

“Talking with you brings me misfortune,” said Porthos.

“But, tell me, what do you ask?”

“Nothing; for that amounts to the same thing as if I asked you for
something.”

The procurator’s wife hung upon the arm of Porthos, and in the violence
of her grief she cried out, “Monsieur Porthos, I am ignorant of all such
matters! How should I know what a horse is? How should I know what horse
furniture is?”

“You should have left it to me, then, madame, who know what they are;
but you wished to be frugal, and consequently to lend at usury.”

“It was wrong, Monsieur Porthos; but I will repair that wrong, upon my
word of honor.”

“How so?” asked the Musketeer.

“Listen. This evening M. Coquenard is going to the house of the Due de
Chaulnes, who has sent for him. It is for a consultation, which will
last three hours at least. Come! We shall be alone, and can make up our
accounts.”

“In good time. Now you talk, my dear.”

“You pardon me?”

“We shall see,” said Porthos, majestically; and the two separated
saying, “Till this evening.”

“The devil!” thought Porthos, as he walked away, “it appears I am
getting nearer to Monsieur Coquenard’s strongbox at last.”




35 A GASCON A MATCH FOR CUPID


The evening so impatiently waited for by Porthos and by d’Artagnan at
last arrived.

As was his custom, d’Artagnan presented himself at Milady’s at about
nine o’clock. He found her in a charming humor. Never had he been so
well received. Our Gascon knew, by the first glance of his eye, that his
billet had been delivered, and that this billet had had its effect.

Kitty entered to bring some sherbet. Her mistress put on a charming
face, and smiled on her graciously; but alas! the poor girl was so sad
that she did not even notice Milady’s condescension.

D’Artagnan looked at the two women, one after the other, and was forced
to acknowledge that in his opinion Dame Nature had made a mistake in
their formation. To the great lady she had given a heart vile and venal;
to the SOUBRETTE she had given the heart of a duchess.

At ten o’clock Milady began to appear restless. D’Artagnan knew what she
wanted. She looked at the clock, rose, reseated herself, smiled at
d’Artagnan with an air which said, “You are very amiable, no doubt, but
you would be charming if you would only depart.”

D’Artagnan rose and took his hat; Milady gave him her hand to kiss. The
young man felt her press his hand, and comprehended that this was a
sentiment, not of coquetry, but of gratitude because of his departure.

“She loves him devilishly,” he murmured. Then he went out.

This time Kitty was nowhere waiting for him; neither in the antechamber,
nor in the corridor, nor beneath the great door. It was necessary that
d’Artagnan should find alone the staircase and the little chamber. She
heard him enter, but she did not raise her head. The young man went to
her and took her hands; then she sobbed aloud.

As d’Artagnan had presumed, on receiving his letter, Milady in a
delirium of joy had told her servant everything; and by way of
recompense for the manner in which she had this time executed the
commission, she had given Kitty a purse.

Returning to her own room, Kitty had thrown the purse into a corner,
where it lay open, disgorging three or four gold pieces on the carpet.
The poor girl, under the caresses of d’Artagnan, lifted her head.
D’Artagnan himself was frightened by the change in her countenance. She
joined her hands with a suppliant air, but without venturing to speak a
word. As little sensitive as was the heart of d’Artagnan, he was touched
by this mute sorrow; but he held too tenaciously to his projects, above
all to this one, to change the program which he had laid out in advance.
He did not therefore allow her any hope that he would flinch; only he
represented his action as one of simple vengeance.

For the rest this vengeance was very easy; for Milady, doubtless to
conceal her blushes from her lover, had ordered Kitty to extinguish all
the lights in the apartment, and even in the little chamber itself.
Before daybreak M. de Wardes must take his departure, still in
obscurity.

Presently they heard Milady retire to her room. D’Artagnan slipped into
the wardrobe. Hardly was he concealed when the little bell sounded.
Kitty went to her mistress, and did not leave the door open; but the
partition was so thin that one could hear nearly all that passed between
the two women.

Milady seemed overcome with joy, and made Kitty repeat the smallest
details of the pretended interview of the soubrette with de Wardes when
he received the letter; how he had responded; what was the expression of
his face; if he seemed very amorous. And to all these questions poor
Kitty, forced to put on a pleasant face, responded in a stifled voice
whose dolorous accent her mistress did not however remark, solely
because happiness is egotistical.

Finally, as the hour for her interview with the count approached, Milady
had everything about her darkened, and ordered Kitty to return to her
own chamber, and introduce de Wardes whenever he presented himself.

Kitty’s detention was not long. Hardly had d’Artagnan seen, through a
crevice in his closet, that the whole apartment was in obscurity, than
he slipped out of his concealment, at the very moment when Kitty
reclosed the door of communication.

“What is that noise?” demanded Milady.

“It is I,” said d’Artagnan in a subdued voice, “I, the Comte de Wardes.”

“Oh, my God, my God!” murmured Kitty, “he has not even waited for the
hour he himself named!”

“Well,” said Milady, in a trembling voice, “why do you not enter? Count,
Count,” added she, “you know that I wait for you.”

At this appeal d’Artagnan drew Kitty quietly away, and slipped into the
chamber.

If rage or sorrow ever torture the heart, it is when a lover receives
under a name which is not his own protestations of love addressed to his
happy rival. D’Artagnan was in a dolorous situation which he had not
foreseen. Jealousy gnawed his heart; and he suffered almost as much as
poor Kitty, who at that very moment was crying in the next chamber.

“Yes, Count,” said Milady, in her softest voice, and pressing his hand
in her own, “I am happy in the love which your looks and your words have
expressed to me every time we have met. I also--I love you. Oh,
tomorrow, tomorrow, I must have some pledge from you which will prove
that you think of me; and that you may not forget me, take this!” and
she slipped a ring from her finger onto d’Artagnan’s. D’Artagnan
remembered having seen this ring on the finger of Milady; it was a
magnificent sapphire, encircled with brilliants.

The first movement of d’Artagnan was to return it, but Milady added,
“No, no! Keep that ring for love of me. Besides, in accepting it,” she
added, in a voice full of emotion, “you render me a much greater service
than you imagine.”

“This woman is full of mysteries,” murmured d’Artagnan to himself. At
that instant he felt himself ready to reveal all. He even opened his
mouth to tell Milady who he was, and with what a revengeful purpose he
had come; but she added, “Poor angel, whom that monster of a Gascon
barely failed to kill.”

The monster was himself.

“Oh,” continued Milady, “do your wounds still make you suffer?”

“Yes, much,” said d’Artagnan, who did not well know how to answer.

“Be tranquil,” murmured Milady; “I will avenge you--and cruelly!”

“PESTE!” said d’Artagnan to himself, “the moment for confidences has not
yet come.”

It took some time for d’Artagnan to resume this little dialogue; but
then all the ideas of vengeance which he had brought with him had
completely vanished. This woman exercised over him an unaccountable
power; he hated and adored her at the same time. He would not have
believed that two sentiments so opposite could dwell in the same heart,
and by their union constitute a passion so strange, and as it were,
diabolical.

Presently it sounded one o’clock. It was necessary to separate.
D’Artagnan at the moment of quitting Milady felt only the liveliest
regret at the parting; and as they addressed each other in a
reciprocally passionate adieu, another interview was arranged for the
following week.

Poor Kitty hoped to speak a few words to d’Artagnan when he passed
through her chamber; but Milady herself reconducted him through the
darkness, and only quit him at the staircase.

The next morning d’Artagnan ran to find Athos. He was engaged in an
adventure so singular that he wished for counsel. He therefore told him
all.

“Your Milady,” said he, “appears to be an infamous creature, but not the
less you have done wrong to deceive her. In one fashion or another you
have a terrible enemy on your hands.”

While thus speaking Athos regarded with attention the sapphire set with
diamonds which had taken, on d’Artagnan’s finger, the place of the
queen’s ring, carefully kept in a casket.

“You notice my ring?” said the Gascon, proud to display so rich a gift
in the eyes of his friends.

“Yes,” said Athos, “it reminds me of a family jewel.”

“It is beautiful, is it not?” said d’Artagnan.

“Yes,” said Athos, “magnificent. I did not think two sapphires of such a
fine water existed. Have you traded it for your diamond?”

“No. It is a gift from my beautiful Englishwoman, or rather
Frenchwoman--for I am convinced she was born in France, though I have
not questioned her.”

“That ring comes from Milady?” cried Athos, with a voice in which it was
easy to detect strong emotion.

“Her very self; she gave it me last night. Here it is,” replied
d’Artagnan, taking it from his finger.

Athos examined it and became very pale. He tried it on his left hand; it
fit his finger as if made for it.

A shade of anger and vengeance passed across the usually calm brow of
this gentleman.

“It is impossible it can be she,” said he. “How could this ring come
into the hands of Milady Clarik? And yet it is difficult to suppose such
a resemblance should exist between two jewels.”

“Do you know this ring?” said d’Artagnan.

“I thought I did,” replied Athos; “but no doubt I was mistaken.” And he
returned d’Artagnan the ring without, however, ceasing to look at it.

“Pray, d’Artagnan,” said Athos, after a minute, “either take off that
ring or turn the mounting inside; it recalls such cruel recollections
that I shall have no head to converse with you. Don’t ask me for
counsel; don’t tell me you are perplexed what to do. But stop! let me
look at that sapphire again; the one I mentioned to you had one of its
faces scratched by accident.”

D’Artagnan took off the ring, giving it again to Athos.

Athos started. “Look,” said he, “is it not strange?” and he pointed out
to d’Artagnan the scratch he had remembered.

“But from whom did this ring come to you, Athos?”

“From my mother, who inherited it from her mother. As I told you, it is
an old family jewel.”

“And you--sold it?” asked d’Artagnan, hesitatingly.

“No,” replied Athos, with a singular smile. “I gave it away in a night
of love, as it has been given to you.”

D’Artagnan became pensive in his turn; it appeared as if there were
abysses in Milady’s soul whose depths were dark and unknown. He took
back the ring, but put it in his pocket and not on his finger.

“d’Artagnan,” said Athos, taking his hand, “you know I love you; if I
had a son I could not love him better. Take my advice, renounce this
woman. I do not know her, but a sort of intuition tells me she is a lost
creature, and that there is something fatal about her.”

“You are right,” said d’Artagnan; “I will have done with her. I own that
this woman terrifies me.”

“Shall you have the courage?” said Athos.

“I shall,” replied d’Artagnan, “and instantly.”

“In truth, my young friend, you will act rightly,” said the gentleman,
pressing the Gascon’s hand with an affection almost paternal; “and God
grant that this woman, who has scarcely entered into your life, may not
leave a terrible trace in it!” And Athos bowed to d’Artagnan like a man
who wishes it understood that he would not be sorry to be left alone
with his thoughts.

On reaching home d’Artagnan found Kitty waiting for him. A month of
fever could not have changed her more than this one night of
sleeplessness and sorrow.

She was sent by her mistress to the false de Wardes. Her mistress was
mad with love, intoxicated with joy. She wished to know when her lover
would meet her a second night; and poor Kitty, pale and trembling,
awaited d’Artagnan’s reply. The counsels of his friend, joined to the
cries of his own heart, made him determine, now his pride was saved and
his vengeance satisfied, not to see Milady again. As a reply, he wrote
the following letter:

Do not depend upon me, madame, for the next meeting. Since my
convalescence I have so many affairs of this kind on my hands that I am
forced to regulate them a little. When your turn comes, I shall have the
honor to inform you of it. I kiss your hands.

Comte de Wardes

Not a word about the sapphire. Was the Gascon determined to keep it as a
weapon against Milady, or else, let us be frank, did he not reserve the
sapphire as a last resource for his outfit? It would be wrong to judge
the actions of one period from the point of view of another. That which
would now be considered as disgraceful to a gentleman was at that time
quite a simple and natural affair, and the younger sons of the best
families were frequently supported by their mistresses. D’Artagnan gave
the open letter to Kitty, who at first was unable to comprehend it, but
who became almost wild with joy on reading it a second time. She could
scarcely believe in her happiness; and d’Artagnan was forced to renew
with the living voice the assurances which he had written. And whatever
might be--considering the violent character of Milady--the danger which
the poor girl incurred in giving this billet to her mistress, she ran
back to the Place Royale as fast as her legs could carry her.

The heart of the best woman is pitiless toward the sorrows of a rival.

Milady opened the letter with eagerness equal to Kitty’s in bringing it;
but at the first words she read she became livid. She crushed the paper
in her hand, and turning with flashing eyes upon Kitty, she cried, “What
is this letter?”

“The answer to Madame’s,” replied Kitty, all in a tremble.

“Impossible!” cried Milady. “It is impossible a gentleman could have
written such a letter to a woman.” Then all at once, starting, she
cried, “My God! can he have--” and she stopped. She ground her teeth;
she was of the color of ashes. She tried to go toward the window for
air, but she could only stretch forth her arms; her legs failed her, and
she sank into an armchair. Kitty, fearing she was ill, hastened toward
her and was beginning to open her dress; but Milady started up, pushing
her away. “What do you want with me?” said she, “and why do you place
your hand on me?”

“I thought that Madame was ill, and I wished to bring her help,”
responded the maid, frightened at the terrible expression which had come
over her mistress’s face.

“I faint? I? I? Do you take me for half a woman? When I am insulted I do
not faint; I avenge myself!”

And she made a sign for Kitty to leave the room.




36 DREAM OF VENGEANCE


That evening Milady gave orders that when M. d’Artagnan came as usual,
he should be immediately admitted; but he did not come.

The next day Kitty went to see the young man again, and related to him
all that had passed on the preceding evening. D’Artagnan smiled; this
jealous anger of Milady was his revenge.

That evening Milady was still more impatient than on the preceding
evening. She renewed the order relative to the Gascon; but as before she
expected him in vain.

The next morning, when Kitty presented herself at d’Artagnan’s, she was
no longer joyous and alert as on the two preceding days; but on the
contrary sad as death.

D’Artagnan asked the poor girl what was the matter with her; but she, as
her only reply, drew a letter from her pocket and gave it to him.

This letter was in Milady’s handwriting; only this time it was addressed
to M. d’Artagnan, and not to M. de Wardes.

He opened it and read as follows:

Dear M. d’Artagnan, It is wrong thus to neglect your friends,
particularly at the moment you are about to leave them for so long a
time. My brother-in-law and myself expected you yesterday and the day
before, but in vain. Will it be the same this evening?

Your very grateful, Milady Clarik

“That’s all very simple,” said d’Artagnan; “I expected this letter. My
credit rises by the fall of that of the Comte de Wardes.”

“And will you go?” asked Kitty.

“Listen to me, my dear girl,” said the Gascon, who sought for an excuse
in his own eyes for breaking the promise he had made Athos; “you must
understand it would be impolitic not to accept such a positive
invitation. Milady, not seeing me come again, would not be able to
understand what could cause the interruption of my visits, and might
suspect something; who could say how far the vengeance of such a woman
would go?”

“Oh, my God!” said Kitty, “you know how to represent things in such a
way that you are always in the right. You are going now to pay your
court to her again, and if this time you succeed in pleasing her in your
own name and with your own face, it will be much worse than before.”

Instinct made poor Kitty guess a part of what was to happen. D’Artagnan
reassured her as well as he could, and promised to remain insensible to
the seductions of Milady.

He desired Kitty to tell her mistress that he could not be more grateful
for her kindnesses than he was, and that he would be obedient to her
orders. He did not dare to write for fear of not being able--to such
experienced eyes as those of Milady--to disguise his writing
sufficiently.

As nine o’clock sounded, d’Artagnan was at the Place Royale. It was
evident that the servants who waited in the antechamber were warned, for
as soon as d’Artagnan appeared, before even he had asked if Milady were
visible, one of them ran to announce him.

“Show him in,” said Milady, in a quick tone, but so piercing that
d’Artagnan heard her in the antechamber.

He was introduced.

“I am at home to nobody,” said Milady; “observe, to nobody.” The servant
went out.

D’Artagnan cast an inquiring glance at Milady. She was pale, and looked
fatigued, either from tears or want of sleep. The number of lights had
been intentionally diminished, but the young woman could not conceal the
traces of the fever which had devoured her for two days.

D’Artagnan approached her with his usual gallantry. She then made an
extraordinary effort to receive him, but never did a more distressed
countenance give the lie to a more amiable smile.

To the questions which d’Artagnan put concerning her health, she
replied, “Bad, very bad.”

“Then,” replied he, “my visit is ill-timed; you, no doubt, stand in need
of repose, and I will withdraw.”

“No, no!” said Milady. “On the contrary, stay, Monsieur d’Artagnan; your
agreeable company will divert me.”

“Oh, oh!” thought d’Artagnan. “She has never been so kind before. On
guard!”

Milady assumed the most agreeable air possible, and conversed with more
than her usual brilliancy. At the same time the fever, which for an
instant abandoned her, returned to give luster to her eyes, color to her
cheeks, and vermillion to her lips. D’Artagnan was again in the presence
of the Circe who had before surrounded him with her enchantments. His
love, which he believed to be extinct but which was only asleep, awoke
again in his heart. Milady smiled, and d’Artagnan felt that he could
damn himself for that smile. There was a moment at which he felt
something like remorse.

By degrees, Milady became more communicative. She asked d’Artagnan if he
had a mistress.

“Alas!” said d’Artagnan, with the most sentimental air he could assume,
“can you be cruel enough to put such a question to me--to me, who, from
the moment I saw you, have only breathed and sighed through you and for
you?”

Milady smiled with a strange smile.

“Then you love me?” said she.

“Have I any need to tell you so? Have you not perceived it?”

“It may be; but you know the more hearts are worth the capture, the more
difficult they are to be won.”

“Oh, difficulties do not affright me,” said d’Artagnan. “I shrink before
nothing but impossibilities.”

“Nothing is impossible,” replied Milady, “to true love.”

“Nothing, madame?”

“Nothing,” replied Milady.

“The devil!” thought d’Artagnan. “The note is changed. Is she going to
fall in love with me, by chance, this fair inconstant; and will she be
disposed to give me myself another sapphire like that which she gave me
for de Wardes?”

D’Artagnan rapidly drew his seat nearer to Milady’s.

“Well, now,” she said, “let us see what you would do to prove this love
of which you speak.”

“All that could be required of me. Order; I am ready.”

“For everything?”

“For everything,” cried d’Artagnan, who knew beforehand that he had not
much to risk in engaging himself thus.

“Well, now let us talk a little seriously,” said Milady, in her turn
drawing her armchair nearer to d’Artagnan’s chair.

“I am all attention, madame,” said he.

Milady remained thoughtful and undecided for a moment; then, as if
appearing to have formed a resolution, she said, “I have an enemy.”

“You, madame!” said d’Artagnan, affecting surprise; “is that possible,
my God?--good and beautiful as you are!”

“A mortal enemy.”

“Indeed!”

“An enemy who has insulted me so cruelly that between him and me it is
war to the death. May I reckon on you as an auxiliary?”

D’Artagnan at once perceived the ground which the vindictive creature
wished to reach.

“You may, madame,” said he, with emphasis. “My arm and my life belong to
you, like my love.”

“Then,” said Milady, “since you are as generous as you are loving--”

She stopped.

“Well?” demanded d’Artagnan.

“Well,” replied Milady, after a moment of silence, “from the present
time, cease to talk of impossibilities.”

“Do not overwhelm me with happiness,” cried d’Artagnan, throwing himself
on his knees, and covering with kisses the hands abandoned to him.

“Avenge me of that infamous de Wardes,” said Milady, between her teeth,
“and I shall soon know how to get rid of you--you double idiot, you
animated sword blade!”

“Fall voluntarily into my arms, hypocritical and dangerous woman,” said
d’Artagnan, likewise to himself, “after having abused me with such
effrontery, and afterward I will laugh at you with him whom you wish me
to kill.”

D’Artagnan lifted up his head.

“I am ready,” said he.

“You have understood me, then, dear Monsieur d’Artagnan,” said Milady.

“I could interpret one of your looks.”

“Then you would employ for me your arm which has already acquired so
much renown?”

“Instantly!”

“But on my part,” said Milady, “how should I repay such a service? I
know these lovers. They are men who do nothing for nothing.”

“You know the only reply that I desire,” said d’Artagnan, “the only one
worthy of you and of me!”

And he drew nearer to her.

She scarcely resisted.

“Interested man!” cried she, smiling.

“Ah,” cried d’Artagnan, really carried away by the passion this woman
had the power to kindle in his heart, “ah, that is because my happiness
appears so impossible to me; and I have such fear that it should fly
away from me like a dream that I pant to make a reality of it.”

“Well, merit this pretended happiness, then!”

“I am at your orders,” said d’Artagnan.

“Quite certain?” said Milady, with a last doubt.

“Only name to me the base man that has brought tears into your beautiful
eyes!”

“Who told you that I had been weeping?” said she.

“It appeared to me--”

“Such women as I never weep,” said Milady.

“So much the better! Come, tell me his name!”

“Remember that his name is all my secret.”

“Yet I must know his name.”

“Yes, you must; see what confidence I have in you!”

“You overwhelm me with joy. What is his name?”

“You know him.”

“Indeed.”

“Yes.”

“It is surely not one of my friends?” replied d’Artagnan, affecting
hesitation in order to make her believe him ignorant.

“If it were one of your friends you would hesitate, then?” cried Milady;
and a threatening glance darted from her eyes.

“Not if it were my own brother!” cried d’Artagnan, as if carried away by
his enthusiasm.

Our Gascon promised this without risk, for he knew all that was meant.

“I love your devotedness,” said Milady.

“Alas, do you love nothing else in me?” asked d’Artagnan.

“I love you also, YOU!” said she, taking his hand.

The warm pressure made d’Artagnan tremble, as if by the touch that fever
which consumed Milady attacked himself.

“You love me, you!” cried he. “Oh, if that were so, I should lose my
reason!”

And he folded her in his arms. She made no effort to remove her lips
from his kisses; only she did not respond to them. Her lips were cold;
it appeared to d’Artagnan that he had embraced a statue.

He was not the less intoxicated with joy, electrified by love. He almost
believed in the tenderness of Milady; he almost believed in the crime of
de Wardes. If de Wardes had at that moment been under his hand, he would
have killed him.

Milady seized the occasion.

“His name is--” said she, in her turn.

“De Wardes; I know it,” cried d’Artagnan.

“And how do you know it?” asked Milady, seizing both his hands, and
endeavoring to read with her eyes to the bottom of his heart.

D’Artagnan felt he had allowed himself to be carried away, and that he
had committed an error.

“Tell me, tell me, tell me, I say,” repeated Milady, “how do you know
it?”

“How do I know it?” said d’Artagnan.

“Yes.”

“I know it because yesterday Monsieur de Wardes, in a saloon where I
was, showed a ring which he said he had received from you.”

“Wretch!” cried Milady.

The epithet, as may be easily understood, resounded to the very bottom
of d’Artagnan’s heart.

“Well?” continued she.

“Well, I will avenge you of this wretch,” replied d’Artagnan, giving
himself the airs of Don Japhet of Armenia.

“Thanks, my brave friend!” cried Milady; “and when shall I be avenged?”

“Tomorrow--immediately--when you please!”

Milady was about to cry out, “Immediately,” but she reflected that such
precipitation would not be very gracious toward d’Artagnan.

Besides, she had a thousand precautions to take, a thousand counsels to
give to her defender, in order that he might avoid explanations with the
count before witnesses. All this was answered by an expression of
d’Artagnan’s. “Tomorrow,” said he, “you will be avenged, or I shall be
dead.”

“No,” said she, “you will avenge me; but you will not be dead. He is a
coward.”

“With women, perhaps; but not with men. I know something of him.”

“But it seems you had not much reason to complain of your fortune in
your contest with him.”

“Fortune is a courtesan; favorable yesterday, she may turn her back
tomorrow.”

“Which means that you now hesitate?”

“No, I do not hesitate; God forbid! But would it be just to allow me to
go to a possible death without having given me at least something more
than hope?”

Milady answered by a glance which said, “Is that all?--speak, then.” And
then accompanying the glance with explanatory words, “That is but too
just,” said she, tenderly.

“Oh, you are an angel!” exclaimed the young man.

“Then all is agreed?” said she.

“Except that which I ask of you, dear love.”

“But when I assure you that you may rely on my tenderness?”

“I cannot wait till tomorrow.”

“Silence! I hear my brother. It will be useless for him to find you
here.”

She rang the bell and Kitty appeared.

“Go out this way,” said she, opening a small private door, “and come
back at eleven o’clock; we will then terminate this conversation. Kitty
will conduct you to my chamber.”

The poor girl almost fainted at hearing these words.

“Well, mademoiselle, what are you thinking about, standing there like a
statue? Do as I bid you: show the chevalier out; and this evening at
eleven o’clock--you have heard what I said.”

“It appears that these appointments are all made for eleven o’clock,”
thought d’Artagnan; “that’s a settled custom.”

Milady held out her hand to him, which he kissed tenderly.

“But,” said he, as he retired as quickly as possible from the reproaches
of Kitty, “I must not play the fool. This woman is certainly a great
liar. I must take care.”




37 MILADY’S SECRET


D’Artagnan left the hotel instead of going up at once to Kitty’s
chamber, as she endeavored to persuade him to do--and that for two
reasons: the first, because by this means he should escape reproaches,
recriminations, and prayers; the second, because he was not sorry to
have an opportunity of reading his own thoughts and endeavoring, if
possible, to fathom those of this woman.

What was most clear in the matter was that d’Artagnan loved Milady like
a madman, and that she did not love him at all. In an instant d’Artagnan
perceived that the best way in which he could act would be to go home
and write Milady a long letter, in which he would confess to her that he
and de Wardes were, up to the present moment absolutely the same, and
that consequently he could not undertake, without committing suicide, to
kill the Comte de Wardes. But he also was spurred on by a ferocious
desire of vengeance. He wished to subdue this woman in his own name; and
as this vengeance appeared to him to have a certain sweetness in it, he
could not make up his mind to renounce it.

He walked six or seven times round the Place Royale, turning at every
ten steps to look at the light in Milady’s apartment, which was to be
seen through the blinds. It was evident that this time the young woman
was not in such haste to retire to her apartment as she had been the
first.

At length the light disappeared. With this light was extinguished the
last irresolution in the heart of d’Artagnan. He recalled to his mind
the details of the first night, and with a beating heart and a brain on
fire he re-entered the hotel and flew toward Kitty’s chamber.

The poor girl, pale as death and trembling in all her limbs, wished to
delay her lover; but Milady, with her ear on the watch, had heard the
noise d’Artagnan had made, and opening the door, said, “Come in.”

All this was of such incredible immodesty, of such monstrous effrontery,
that d’Artagnan could scarcely believe what he saw or what he heard. He
imagined himself to be drawn into one of those fantastic intrigues one
meets in dreams. He, however, darted not the less quickly toward Milady,
yielding to that magnetic attraction which the loadstone exercises over
iron.

As the door closed after them Kitty rushed toward it. Jealousy, fury,
offended pride, all the passions in short that dispute the heart of an
outraged woman in love, urged her to make a revelation; but she
reflected that she would be totally lost if she confessed having
assisted in such a machination, and above all, that d’Artagnan would
also be lost to her forever. This last thought of love counseled her to
make this last sacrifice.

D’Artagnan, on his part, had gained the summit of all his wishes. It was
no longer a rival who was beloved; it was himself who was apparently
beloved. A secret voice whispered to him, at the bottom of his heart,
that he was but an instrument of vengeance, that he was only caressed
till he had given death; but pride, but self-love, but madness silenced
this voice and stifled its murmurs. And then our Gascon, with that large
quantity of conceit which we know he possessed, compared himself with de
Wardes, and asked himself why, after all, he should not be beloved for
himself?

He was absorbed entirely by the sensations of the moment. Milady was no
longer for him that woman of fatal intentions who had for a moment
terrified him; she was an ardent, passionate mistress, abandoning
herself to love which she also seemed to feel. Two hours thus glided
away. When the transports of the two lovers were calmer, Milady, who had
not the same motives for forgetfulness that d’Artagnan had, was the
first to return to reality, and asked the young man if the means which
were on the morrow to bring on the encounter between him and de Wardes
were already arranged in his mind.

But d’Artagnan, whose ideas had taken quite another course, forgot
himself like a fool, and answered gallantly that it was too late to
think about duels and sword thrusts.

This coldness toward the only interests that occupied her mind terrified
Milady, whose questions became more pressing.

Then d’Artagnan, who had never seriously thought of this impossible
duel, endeavored to turn the conversation; but he could not succeed.
Milady kept him within the limits she had traced beforehand with her
irresistible spirit and her iron will.

D’Artagnan fancied himself very cunning when advising Milady to
renounce, by pardoning de Wardes, the furious projects she had formed.

But at the first word the young woman started, and exclaimed in a sharp,
bantering tone, which sounded strangely in the darkness, “Are you
afraid, dear Monsieur d’Artagnan?”

“You cannot think so, dear love!” replied d’Artagnan; “but now, suppose
this poor Comte de Wardes were less guilty than you think him?”

“At all events,” said Milady, seriously, “he has deceived me, and from
the moment he deceived me, he merited death.”

“He shall die, then, since you condemn him!” said d’Artagnan, in so firm
a tone that it appeared to Milady an undoubted proof of devotion. This
reassured her.

We cannot say how long the night seemed to Milady, but d’Artagnan
believed it to be hardly two hours before the daylight peeped through
the window blinds, and invaded the chamber with its paleness. Seeing
d’Artagnan about to leave her, Milady recalled his promise to avenge her
on the Comte de Wardes.

“I am quite ready,” said d’Artagnan; “but in the first place I should
like to be certain of one thing.”

“And what is that?” asked Milady.

“That is, whether you really love me?”

“I have given you proof of that, it seems to me.”

“And I am yours, body and soul!”

“Thanks, my brave lover; but as you are satisfied of my love, you must,
in your turn, satisfy me of yours. Is it not so?”

“Certainly; but if you love me as much as you say,” replied d’Artagnan,
“do you not entertain a little fear on my account?”

“What have I to fear?”

“Why, that I may be dangerously wounded--killed even.”

“Impossible!” cried Milady, “you are such a valiant man, and such an
expert swordsman.”

“You would not, then, prefer a method,” resumed d’Artagnan, “which would
equally avenge you while rendering the combat useless?”

Milady looked at her lover in silence. The pale light of the first rays
of day gave to her clear eyes a strangely frightful expression.

“Really,” said she, “I believe you now begin to hesitate.”

“No, I do not hesitate; but I really pity this poor Comte de Wardes,
since you have ceased to love him. I think that a man must be so
severely punished by the loss of your love that he stands in need of no
other chastisement.”

“Who told you that I loved him?” asked Milady, sharply.

“At least, I am now at liberty to believe, without too much fatuity,
that you love another,” said the young man, in a caressing tone, “and I
repeat that I am really interested for the count.”

“You?” asked Milady.

“Yes, I.”

“And why YOU?”

“Because I alone know--”

“What?”

“That he is far from being, or rather having been, so guilty toward you
as he appears.”

“Indeed!” said Milady, in an anxious tone; “explain yourself, for I
really cannot tell what you mean.”

And she looked at d’Artagnan, who embraced her tenderly, with eyes which
seemed to burn themselves away.

“Yes; I am a man of honor,” said d’Artagnan, determined to come to an
end, “and since your love is mine, and I am satisfied I possess it--for
I do possess it, do I not?”

“Entirely; go on.”

“Well, I feel as if transformed--a confession weighs on my mind.”

“A confession!”

“If I had the least doubt of your love I would not make it, but you love
me, my beautiful mistress, do you not?”

“Without doubt.”

“Then if through excess of love I have rendered myself culpable toward
you, you will pardon me?”

“Perhaps.”

D’Artagnan tried with his sweetest smile to touch his lips to Milady’s,
but she evaded him.

“This confession,” said she, growing paler, “what is this confession?”

“You gave de Wardes a meeting on Thursday last in this very room, did
you not?”

“No, no! It is not true,” said Milady, in a tone of voice so firm, and
with a countenance so unchanged, that if d’Artagnan had not been in such
perfect possession of the fact, he would have doubted.

“Do not lie, my angel,” said d’Artagnan, smiling; “that would be
useless.”

“What do you mean? Speak! you kill me.”

“Be satisfied; you are not guilty toward me, and I have already pardoned
you.”

“What next? what next?”

“De Wardes cannot boast of anything.”

“How is that? You told me yourself that that ring--”

“That ring I have! The Comte de Wardes of Thursday and the d’Artagnan of
today are the same person.”

The imprudent young man expected a surprise, mixed with shame--a slight
storm which would resolve itself into tears; but he was strangely
deceived, and his error was not of long duration.

Pale and trembling, Milady repulsed d’Artagnan’s attempted embrace by a
violent blow on the chest, as she sprang out of bed.

It was almost broad daylight.

D’Artagnan detained her by her night dress of fine India linen, to
implore her pardon; but she, with a strong movement, tried to escape.
Then the cambric was torn from her beautiful shoulders; and on one of
those lovely shoulders, round and white, d’Artagnan recognized, with
inexpressible astonishment, the FLEUR-DE-LIS--that indelible mark which
the hand of the infamous executioner had imprinted.

“Great God!” cried d’Artagnan, loosing his hold of her dress, and
remaining mute, motionless, and frozen.

But Milady felt herself denounced even by his terror. He had doubtless
seen all. The young man now knew her secret, her terrible secret--the
secret she concealed even from her maid with such care, the secret of
which all the world was ignorant, except himself.

She turned upon him, no longer like a furious woman, but like a wounded
panther.

“Ah, wretch!” cried she, “you have basely betrayed me, and still more,
you have my secret! You shall die.”

And she flew to a little inlaid casket which stood upon the dressing
table, opened it with a feverish and trembling hand, drew from it a
small poniard, with a golden haft and a sharp thin blade, and then threw
herself with a bound upon d’Artagnan.

Although the young man was brave, as we know, he was terrified at that
wild countenance, those terribly dilated pupils, those pale cheeks, and
those bleeding lips. He recoiled to the other side of the room as he
would have done from a serpent which was crawling toward him, and his
sword coming in contact with his nervous hand, he drew it almost
unconsciously from the scabbard. But without taking any heed of the
sword, Milady endeavored to get near enough to him to stab him, and did
not stop till she felt the sharp point at her throat.

She then tried to seize the sword with her hands; but d’Artagnan kept it
free from her grasp, and presenting the point, sometimes at her eyes,
sometimes at her breast, compelled her to glide behind the bedstead,
while he aimed at making his retreat by the door which led to Kitty’s
apartment.

Milady during this time continued to strike at him with horrible fury,
screaming in a formidable way.

As all this, however, bore some resemblance to a duel, d’Artagnan began
to recover himself little by little.

“Well, beautiful lady, very well,” said he; “but, PARDIEU, if you don’t
calm yourself, I will design a second FLEUR-DE-LIS upon one of those
pretty cheeks!”

“Scoundrel, infamous scoundrel!” howled Milady.

But d’Artagnan, still keeping on the defensive, drew near to Kitty’s
door. At the noise they made, she in overturning the furniture in her
efforts to get at him, he in screening himself behind the furniture to
keep out of her reach, Kitty opened the door. D’Artagnan, who had
unceasingly maneuvered to gain this point, was not at more than three
paces from it. With one spring he flew from the chamber of Milady into
that of the maid, and quick as lightning, he slammed to the door, and
placed all his weight against it, while Kitty pushed the bolts.

Then Milady attempted to tear down the doorcase, with a strength
apparently above that of a woman; but finding she could not accomplish
this, she in her fury stabbed at the door with her poniard, the point of
which repeatedly glittered through the wood. Every blow was accompanied
with terrible imprecations.

“Quick, Kitty, quick!” said d’Artagnan, in a low voice, as soon as the
bolts were fast, “let me get out of the hotel; for if we leave her time
to turn round, she will have me killed by the servants.”

“But you can’t go out so,” said Kitty; “you are naked.”

“That’s true,” said d’Artagnan, then first thinking of the costume he
found himself in, “that’s true. But dress me as well as you are able,
only make haste; think, my dear girl, it’s life and death!”

Kitty was but too well aware of that. In a turn of the hand she muffled
him up in a flowered robe, a large hood, and a cloak. She gave him some
slippers, in which he placed his naked feet, and then conducted him down
the stairs. It was time. Milady had already rung her bell, and roused
the whole hotel. The porter was drawing the cord at the moment Milady
cried from her window, “Don’t open!”

The young man fled while she was still threatening him with an impotent
gesture. The moment she lost sight of him, Milady tumbled fainting into
her chamber.




38 HOW, WITHOUT INCOMMDING HIMSELF, ATHOS PROCURES HIS EQUIPMENT


D’Artagnan was so completely bewildered that without taking any heed of
what might become of Kitty he ran at full speed across half Paris, and
did not stop till he came to Athos’s door. The confusion of his mind,
the terror which spurred him on, the cries of some of the patrol who
started in pursuit of him, and the hooting of the people who,
notwithstanding the early hour, were going to their work, only made him
precipitate his course.

He crossed the court, ran up the two flights to Athos’s apartment, and
knocked at the door enough to break it down.

Grimaud came, rubbing his half-open eyes, to answer this noisy summons,
and d’Artagnan sprang with such violence into the room as nearly to
overturn the astonished lackey.

In spite of his habitual silence, the poor lad this time found his
speech.

“Holloa, there!” cried he; “what do you want, you strumpet? What’s your
business here, you hussy?”

D’Artagnan threw off his hood, and disengaged his hands from the folds
of the cloak. At sight of the mustaches and the naked sword, the poor
devil perceived he had to deal with a man. He then concluded it must be
an assassin.

“Help! murder! help!” cried he.

“Hold your tongue, you stupid fellow!” said the young man; “I am
d’Artagnan; don’t you know me? Where is your master?”

“You, Monsieur d’Artagnan!” cried Grimaud, “impossible.”

“Grimaud,” said Athos, coming out of his apartment in a dressing gown,
“Grimaud, I thought I heard you permitting yourself to speak?”

“Ah, monsieur, it is--”

“Silence!”

Grimaud contented himself with pointing d’Artagnan out to his master
with his finger.

Athos recognized his comrade, and phlegmatic as he was, he burst into a
laugh which was quite excused by the strange masquerade before his
eyes--petticoats falling over his shoes, sleeves tucked up, and
mustaches stiff with agitation.

“Don’t laugh, my friend!” cried d’Artagnan; “for heaven’s sake, don’t
laugh, for upon my soul, it’s no laughing matter!”

And he pronounced these words with such a solemn air and with such a
real appearance of terror, that Athos eagerly seized his hand, crying,
“Are you wounded, my friend? How pale you are!”

“No, but I have just met with a terrible adventure! Are you alone,
Athos?”

“PARBLEU! whom do you expect to find with me at this hour?”

“Well, well!” and d’Artagnan rushed into Athos’s chamber.

“Come, speak!” said the latter, closing the door and bolting it, that
they might not be disturbed. “Is the king dead? Have you killed the
cardinal? You are quite upset! Come, come, tell me; I am dying with
curiosity and uneasiness!”

“Athos,” said d’Artagnan, getting rid of his female garments, and
appearing in his shirt, “prepare yourself to hear an incredible, an
unheard-of story.”

“Well, but put on this dressing gown first,” said the Musketeer to his
friend.

D’Artagnan donned the robe as quickly as he could, mistaking one sleeve
for the other, so greatly was he still agitated.

“Well?” said Athos.

“Well,” replied d’Artagnan, bending his mouth to Athos’s ear, and
lowering his voice, “Milady is marked with a FLEUR-DE-LIS upon her
shoulder!”

“Ah!” cried the Musketeer, as if he had received a ball in his heart.

“Let us see,” said d’Artagnan. “Are you SURE that the OTHER is dead?”

“THE OTHER?” said Athos, in so stifled a voice that d’Artagnan scarcely
heard him.

“Yes, she of whom you told me one day at Amiens.”

Athos uttered a groan, and let his head sink on his hands.

“This is a woman of twenty-six or twenty-eight years.”

“Fair,” said Athos, “is she not?”

“Very.”

“Blue and clear eyes, of a strange brilliancy, with black eyelids and
eyebrows?”

“Yes.”

“Tall, well-made? She has lost a tooth, next to the eyetooth on the
left?”

“Yes.”

“The FLEUR-DE-LIS is small, rosy in color, and looks as if efforts had
been made to efface it by the application of poultices?”

“Yes.”

“But you say she is English?”

“She is called Milady, but she may be French. Lord de Winter is only her
brother-in-law.”

“I will see her, d’Artagnan!”

“Beware, Athos, beware. You tried to kill her; she is a woman to return
you the like, and not to fail.”

“She will not dare to say anything; that would be to denounce herself.”

“She is capable of anything or everything. Did you ever see her
furious?”

“No,” said Athos.

“A tigress, a panther! Ah, my dear Athos, I am greatly afraid I have
drawn a terrible vengeance on both of us!”

D’Artagnan then related all--the mad passion of Milady and her menaces
of death.

“You are right; and upon my soul, I would give my life for a hair,” said
Athos. “Fortunately, the day after tomorrow we leave Paris. We are going
according to all probability to La Rochelle, and once gone--”

“She will follow you to the end of the world, Athos, if she recognizes
you. Let her, then, exhaust her vengeance on me alone!”

“My dear friend, of what consequence is it if she kills me?” said Athos.
“Do you, perchance, think I set any great store by life?”

“There is something horribly mysterious under all this, Athos; this
woman is one of the cardinal’s spies, I am sure of that.”

“In that case, take care! If the cardinal does not hold you in high
admiration for the affair of London, he entertains a great hatred for
you; but as, considering everything, he cannot accuse you openly, and as
hatred must be satisfied, particularly when it’s a cardinal’s hatred,
take care of yourself. If you go out, do not go out alone; when you eat,
use every precaution. Mistrust everything, in short, even your own
shadow.”

“Fortunately,” said d’Artagnan, “all this will be only necessary till
after tomorrow evening, for when once with the army, we shall have, I
hope, only men to dread.”

“In the meantime,” said Athos, “I renounce my plan of seclusion, and
wherever you go, I will go with you. You must return to the Rue des
Fossoyeurs; I will accompany you.”

“But however near it may be,” replied d’Artagnan, “I cannot go thither
in this guise.”

“That’s true,” said Athos, and he rang the bell.

Grimaud entered.

Athos made him a sign to go to d’Artagnan’s residence, and bring back
some clothes. Grimaud replied by another sign that he understood
perfectly, and set off.

“All this will not advance your outfit,” said Athos; “for if I am not
mistaken, you have left the best of your apparel with Milady, and she
will certainly not have the politeness to return it to you. Fortunately,
you have the sapphire.”

“The jewel is yours, my dear Athos! Did you not tell me it was a family
jewel?”

“Yes, my grandfather gave two thousand crowns for it, as he once told
me. It formed part of the nuptial present he made his wife, and it is
magnificent. My mother gave it to me, and I, fool as I was, instead of
keeping the ring as a holy relic, gave it to this wretch.”

“Then, my friend, take back this ring, to which I see you attach much
value.”

“I take back the ring, after it has passed through the hands of that
infamous creature? Never; that ring is defiled, d’Artagnan.”

“Sell it, then.”

“Sell a jewel which came from my mother! I vow I should consider it a
profanation.”

“Pledge it, then; you can borrow at least a thousand crowns on it. With
that sum you can extricate yourself from your present difficulties; and
when you are full of money again, you can redeem it, and take it back
cleansed from its ancient stains, as it will have passed through the
hands of usurers.”

Athos smiled.

“You are a capital companion, d’Artagnan,” said be; “your never-failing
cheerfulness raises poor souls in affliction. Well, let us pledge the
ring, but upon one condition.”

“What?”

“That there shall be five hundred crowns for you, and five hundred
crowns for me.”

“Don’t dream it, Athos. I don’t need the quarter of such a sum--I who am
still only in the Guards--and by selling my saddles, I shall procure it.
What do I want? A horse for Planchet, that’s all. Besides, you forget
that I have a ring likewise.”

“To which you attach more value, it seems, than I do to mine; at least,
I have thought so.”

“Yes, for in any extreme circumstance it might not only extricate us
from some great embarrassment, but even a great danger. It is not only a
valuable diamond, but it is an enchanted talisman.”

“I don’t at all understand you, but I believe all you say to be true.
Let us return to my ring, or rather to yours. You shall take half the
sum that will be advanced upon it, or I will throw it into the Seine;
and I doubt, as was the case with Polycrates, whether any fish will be
sufficiently complaisant to bring it back to us.”

“Well, I will take it, then,” said d’Artagnan.

At this moment Grimaud returned, accompanied by Planchet; the latter,
anxious about his master and curious to know what had happened to him,
had taken advantage of the opportunity and brought the garments himself.

d’Artagnan dressed himself, and Athos did the same. When the two were
ready to go out, the latter made Grimaud the sign of a man taking aim,
and the lackey immediately took down his musketoon, and prepared to
follow his master.

They arrived without accident at the Rue des Fossoyeurs. Bonacieux was
standing at the door, and looked at d’Artagnan hatefully.

“Make haste, dear lodger,” said he; “there is a very pretty girl waiting
for you upstairs; and you know women don’t like to be kept waiting.”

“That’s Kitty!” said d’Artagnan to himself, and darted into the passage.

Sure enough! Upon the landing leading to the chamber, and crouching
against the door, he found the poor girl, all in a tremble. As soon as
she perceived him, she cried, “You have promised your protection; you
have promised to save me from her anger. Remember, it is you who have
ruined me!”

“Yes, yes, to be sure, Kitty,” said d’Artagnan; “be at ease, my girl.
But what happened after my departure?”

“How can I tell!” said Kitty. “The lackeys were brought by the cries she
made. She was mad with passion. There exist no imprecations she did not
pour out against you. Then I thought she would remember it was through
my chamber you had penetrated hers, and that then she would suppose I
was your accomplice; so I took what little money I had and the best of
my things, and I got away.

“Poor dear girl! But what can I do with you? I am going away the day
after tomorrow.”

“Do what you please, Monsieur Chevalier. Help me out of Paris; help me
out of France!”

“I cannot take you, however, to the siege of La Rochelle,” aid
d’Artagnan.

“No; but you can place me in one of the provinces with some lady of your
acquaintance--in your own country, for instance.”

“My dear little love! In my country the ladies do without chambermaids.
But stop! I can manage your business for you. Planchet, go and find
Aramis. Request him to come here directly. We have something very
important to say to him.”

“I understand,” said Athos; “but why not Porthos? I should have thought
that his duchess--”

“Oh, Porthos’s duchess is dressed by her husband’s clerks,” said
d’Artagnan, laughing. “Besides, Kitty would not like to live in the Rue
aux Ours. Isn’t it so, Kitty?”

“I do not care where I live,” said Kitty, “provided I am well concealed,
and nobody knows where I am.”

“Meanwhile, Kitty, when we are about to separate, and you are no longer
jealous of me--”

“Monsieur Chevalier, far off or near,” said Kitty, “I shall always love
you.”

“Where the devil will constancy niche itself next?” murmured Athos.

“And I, also,” said d’Artagnan, “I also. I shall always love you; be
sure of that. But now answer me. I attach great importance to the
question I am about to put to you. Did you never hear talk of a young
woman who was carried off one night?”

“There, now! Oh, Monsieur Chevalier, do you love that woman still?”

“No, no; it is one of my friends who loves her--Monsieur Athos, this
gentleman here.”

“I?” cried Athos, with an accent like that of a man who perceives he is
about to tread upon an adder.

“You, to be sure!” said d’Artagnan, pressing Athos’s hand. “You know the
interest we both take in this poor little Madame Bonacieux. Besides,
Kitty will tell nothing; will you, Kitty? You understand, my dear girl,”
continued d’Artagnan, “she is the wife of that frightful baboon you saw
at the door as you came in.”

“Oh, my God! You remind me of my fright! If he should have known me
again!”

“How? know you again? Did you ever see that man before?”

“He came twice to Milady’s.”

“That’s it. About what time?”

“Why, about fifteen or eighteen days ago.”

“Exactly so.”

“And yesterday evening he came again.”

“Yesterday evening?”

“Yes, just before you came.”

“My dear Athos, we are enveloped in a network of spies. And do you
believe he knew you again, Kitty?”

“I pulled down my hood as soon as I saw him, but perhaps it was too
late.”

“Go down, Athos--he mistrusts you less than me--and see if he be still
at his door.”

Athos went down and returned immediately.

“He has gone,” said he, “and the house door is shut.”

“He has gone to make his report, and to say that all the pigeons are at
this moment in the dovecot.”

“Well, then, let us all fly,” said Athos, “and leave nobody here but
Planchet to bring us news.”

“A minute. Aramis, whom we have sent for!”

“That’s true,” said Athos; “we must wait for Aramis.”

At that moment Aramis entered.

The matter was all explained to him, and the friends gave him to
understand that among all his high connections he must find a place for
Kitty.

Aramis reflected for a minute, and then said, coloring, “Will it be
really rendering you a service, d’Artagnan?”

“I shall be grateful to you all my life.”

“Very well. Madame de Bois-Tracy asked me, for one of her friends who
resides in the provinces, I believe, for a trustworthy maid. If you can,
my dear d’Artagnan, answer for Mademoiselle-”

“Oh, monsieur, be assured that I shall be entirely devoted to the person
who will give me the means of quitting Paris.”

“Then,” said Aramis, “this falls out very well.”

He placed himself at the table and wrote a little note which he sealed
with a ring, and gave the billet to Kitty.

“And now, my dear girl,” said d’Artagnan, “you know that it is not good
for any of us to be here. Therefore let us separate. We shall meet again
in better days.”

“And whenever we find each other, in whatever place it may be,” said
Kitty, “you will find me loving you as I love you today.”

“Dicers’ oaths!” said Athos, while d’Artagnan went to conduct Kitty
downstairs.

An instant afterward the three young men separated, agreeing to meet
again at four o’clock with Athos, and leaving Planchet to guard the
house.

Aramis returned home, and Athos and d’Artagnan busied themselves about
pledging the sapphire.

As the Gascon had foreseen, they easily obtained three hundred pistoles
on the ring. Still further, the Jew told them that if they would sell it
to him, as it would make a magnificent pendant for earrings, he would
give five hundred pistoles for it.

Athos and d’Artagnan, with the activity of two soldiers and the
knowledge of two connoisseurs, hardly required three hours to purchase
the entire equipment of the Musketeer. Besides, Athos was very easy, and
a noble to his fingers’ ends. When a thing suited him he paid the price
demanded, without thinking to ask for any abatement. D’Artagnan would
have remonstrated at this; but Athos put his hand upon his shoulder,
with a smile, and d’Artagnan understood that it was all very well for
such a little Gascon gentleman as himself to drive a bargain, but not
for a man who had the bearing of a prince. The Musketeer met with a
superb Andalusian horse, black as jet, nostrils of fire, legs clean and
elegant, rising six years. He examined him, and found him sound and
without blemish. They asked a thousand livres for him.

He might perhaps have been bought for less; but while d’Artagnan was
discussing the price with the dealer, Athos was counting out the money
on the table.

Grimaud had a stout, short Picard cob, which cost three hundred livres.

But when the saddle and arms for Grimaud were purchased, Athos had not a
sou left of his hundred and fifty pistoles. D’Artagnan offered his
friend a part of his share which he should return when convenient.

But Athos only replied to this proposal by shrugging his shoulders.

“How much did the Jew say he would give for the sapphire if he purchased
it?” said Athos.

“Five hundred pistoles.”

“That is to say, two hundred more--a hundred pistoles for you and a
hundred pistoles for me. Well, now, that would be a real fortune to us,
my friend; let us go back to the Jew’s again.”

“What! will you--”

“This ring would certainly only recall very bitter remembrances; then we
shall never be masters of three hundred pistoles to redeem it, so that
we really should lose two hundred pistoles by the bargain. Go and tell
him the ring is his, d’Artagnan, and bring back the two hundred pistoles
with you.”

“Reflect, Athos!”

“Ready money is needful for the present time, and we must learn how to
make sacrifices. Go, d’Artagnan, go; Grimaud will accompany you with his
musketoon.”

A half hour afterward, d’Artagnan returned with the two thousand livres,
and without having met with any accident.

It was thus Athos found at home resources which he did not expect.




39 A VISION


At four o’clock the four friends were all assembled with Athos. Their
anxiety about their outfits had all disappeared, and each countenance
only preserved the expression of its own secret disquiet--for behind all
present happiness is concealed a fear for the future.

Suddenly Planchet entered, bringing two letters for d’Artagnan.

The one was a little billet, genteelly folded, with a pretty seal in
green wax on which was impressed a dove bearing a green branch.

The other was a large square epistle, resplendent with the terrible arms
of his Eminence the cardinal duke.

At the sight of the little letter the heart of d’Artagnan bounded, for
he believed he recognized the handwriting, and although he had seen that
writing but once, the memory of it remained at the bottom of his heart.

He therefore seized the little epistle, and opened it eagerly.

“Be,” said the letter, “on Thursday next, at from six to seven o’clock
in the evening, on the road to Chaillot, and look carefully into the
carriages that pass; but if you have any consideration for your own life
or that of those who love you, do not speak a single word, do not make a
movement which may lead anyone to believe you have recognized her who
exposes herself to everything for the sake of seeing you but for an
instant.”

No signature.

“That’s a snare,” said Athos; “don’t go, d’Artagnan.”

“And yet,” replied d’Artagnan, “I think I recognize the writing.”

“It may be counterfeit,” said Athos. “Between six and seven o’clock the
road of Chaillot is quite deserted; you might as well go and ride in the
forest of Bondy.”

“But suppose we all go,” said d’Artagnan; “what the devil! They won’t
devour us all four, four lackeys, horses, arms, and all!”

“And besides, it will be a chance for displaying our new equipments,”
said Porthos.

“But if it is a woman who writes,” said Aramis, “and that woman desires
not to be seen, remember, you compromise her, d’Artagnan; which is not
the part of a gentleman.”

“We will remain in the background,” said Porthos, “and he will advance
alone.”

“Yes; but a pistol shot is easily fired from a carriage which goes at a
gallop.”

“Bah!” said d’Artagnan, “they will miss me; if they fire we will ride
after the carriage, and exterminate those who may be in it. They must be
enemies.”

“He is right,” said Porthos; “battle. Besides, we must try our own
arms.”

“Bah, let us enjoy that pleasure,” said Aramis, with his mild and
careless manner.

“As you please,” said Athos.

“Gentlemen,” said d’Artagnan, “it is half past four, and we have
scarcely time to be on the road of Chaillot by six.”

“Besides, if we go out too late, nobody will see us,” said Porthos, “and
that will be a pity. Let us get ready, gentlemen.”

“But this second letter,” said Athos, “you forget that; it appears to
me, however, that the seal denotes that it deserves to be opened. For my
part, I declare, d’Artagnan, I think it of much more consequence than
the little piece of waste paper you have so cunningly slipped into your
bosom.”

D’Artagnan blushed.

“Well,” said he, “let us see, gentlemen, what are his Eminence’s
commands,” and d’Artagnan unsealed the letter and read,

“M. d’Artagnan, of the king’s Guards, company Dessessart, is expected at
the Palais-Cardinal this evening, at eight o’clock.

“La Houdiniere, CAPTAIN OF THE GUARDS”

“The devil!” said Athos; “here’s a rendezvous much more serious than the
other.”

“I will go to the second after attending the first,” said d’Artagnan.
“One is for seven o’clock, and the other for eight; there will be time
for both.”

“Hum! I would not go at all,” said Aramis. “A gallant knight cannot
decline a rendezvous with a lady; but a prudent gentleman may excuse
himself from not waiting on his Eminence, particularly when he has
reason to believe he is not invited to make his compliments.”

“I am of Aramis’s opinion,” said Porthos.

“Gentlemen,” replied d’Artagnan, “I have already received by Monsieur de
Cavois a similar invitation from his Eminence. I neglected it, and on
the morrow a serious misfortune happened to me--Constance disappeared.
Whatever may ensue, I will go.”

“If you are determined,” said Athos, “do so.”

“But the Bastille?” said Aramis.

“Bah! you will get me out if they put me there,” said d’Artagnan.

“To be sure we will,” replied Aramis and Porthos, with admirable
promptness and decision, as if that were the simplest thing in the
world, “to be sure we will get you out; but meantime, as we are to set
off the day after tomorrow, you would do much better not to risk this
Bastille.”

“Let us do better than that,” said Athos; “do not let us leave him
during the whole evening. Let each of us wait at a gate of the palace
with three Musketeers behind him; if we see a close carriage, at all
suspicious in appearance, come out, let us fall upon it. It is a long
time since we have had a skirmish with the Guards of Monsieur the
Cardinal; Monsieur de Treville must think us dead.”

“To a certainty, Athos,” said Aramis, “you were meant to be a general of
the army! What do you think of the plan, gentlemen?”

“Admirable!” replied the young men in chorus.

“Well,” said Porthos, “I will run to the hotel, and engage our comrades
to hold themselves in readiness by eight o’clock; the rendezvous, the
Place du Palais-Cardinal. Meantime, you see that the lackeys saddle the
horses.”

“I have no horse,” said d’Artagnan; “but that is of no consequence, I
can take one of Monsieur de Treville’s.”

“That is not worth while,” said Aramis, “you can have one of mine.”

“One of yours! how many have you, then?” asked d’Artagnan.

“Three,” replied Aramis, smiling.

“Certes,” cried Athos, “you are the best-mounted poet of France or
Navarre.”

“Well, my dear Aramis, you don’t want three horses? I cannot comprehend
what induced you to buy three!”

“Therefore I only purchased two,” said Aramis.

“The third, then, fell from the clouds, I suppose?”

“No, the third was brought to me this very morning by a groom out of
livery, who would not tell me in whose service he was, and who said he
had received orders from his master.”

“Or his mistress,” interrupted d’Artagnan.

“That makes no difference,” said Aramis, coloring; “and who affirmed, as
I said, that he had received orders from his master or mistress to place
the horse in my stable, without informing me whence it came.”

“It is only to poets that such things happen,” said Athos, gravely.

“Well, in that case, we can manage famously,” said d’Artagnan; “which of
the two horses will you ride--that which you bought or the one that was
given to you?”

“That which was given to me, assuredly. You cannot for a moment imagine,
d’Artagnan, that I would commit such an offense toward--”

“The unknown giver,” interrupted d’Artagnan.

“Or the mysterious benefactress,” said Athos.

“The one you bought will then become useless to you?”

“Nearly so.”

“And you selected it yourself?”

“With the greatest care. The safety of the horseman, you know, depends
almost always upon the goodness of his horse.”

“Well, transfer it to me at the price it cost you?”

“I was going to make you the offer, my dear d’Artagnan, giving you all
the time necessary for repaying me such a trifle.”

“How much did it cost you?”

“Eight hundred livres.”

“Here are forty double pistoles, my dear friend,” said d’Artagnan,
taking the sum from his pocket; “I know that is the coin in which you
were paid for your poems.”

“You are rich, then?” said Aramis.

“Rich? Richest, my dear fellow!”

And d’Artagnan chinked the remainder of his pistoles in his pocket.

“Send your saddle, then, to the hotel of the Musketeers, and your horse
can be brought back with ours.”

“Very well; but it is already five o’clock, so make haste.”

A quarter of an hour afterward Porthos appeared at the end of the Rue
Ferou on a very handsome genet. Mousqueton followed him upon an Auvergne
horse, small but very handsome. Porthos was resplendent with joy and
pride.

At the same time, Aramis made his appearance at the other end of the
street upon a superb English charger. Bazin followed him upon a roan,
holding by the halter a vigorous Mecklenburg horse; this was
d’Artagnan’s mount.

The two Musketeers met at the gate. Athos and d’Artagnan watched their
approach from the window.

“The devil!” cried Aramis, “you have a magnificent horse there,
Porthos.”

“Yes,” replied Porthos, “it is the one that ought to have been sent to
me at first. A bad joke of the husband’s substituted the other; but the
husband has been punished since, and I have obtained full satisfaction.”

Planchet and Grimaud appeared in their turn, leading their masters’
steeds. D’Artagnan and Athos put themselves into saddle with their
companions, and all four set forward; Athos upon a horse he owed to a
woman, Aramis on a horse he owed to his mistress, Porthos on a horse he
owed to his procurator’s wife, and d’Artagnan on a horse he owed to his
good fortune--the best mistress possible.

The lackeys followed.

As Porthos had foreseen, the cavalcade produced a good effect; and if
Mme. Coquenard had met Porthos and seen what a superb appearance he made
upon his handsome Spanish genet, she would not have regretted the
bleeding she had inflicted upon the strongbox of her husband.

Near the Louvre the four friends met with M. de Treville, who was
returning from St. Germain; he stopped them to offer his compliments
upon their appointments, which in an instant drew round them a hundred
gapers.

D’Artagnan profited by the circumstance to speak to M. de Treville of
the letter with the great red seal and the cardinal’s arms. It is well
understood that he did not breathe a word about the other.

M de Treville approved of the resolution he had adopted, and assured him
that if on the morrow he did not appear, he himself would undertake to
find him, let him be where he might.

At this moment the clock of La Samaritaine struck six; the four friends
pleaded an engagement, and took leave of M. de Treville.

A short gallop brought them to the road of Chaillot; the day began to
decline, carriages were passing and repassing. D’Artagnan, keeping at
some distance from his friends, darted a scrutinizing glance into every
carriage that appeared, but saw no face with which he was acquainted.

At length, after waiting a quarter of an hour and just as twilight was
beginning to thicken, a carriage appeared, coming at a quick pace on the
road of Sevres. A presentiment instantly told d’Artagnan that this
carriage contained the person who had appointed the rendezvous; the
young man was himself astonished to find his heart beat so violently.
Almost instantly a female head was put out at the window, with two
fingers placed upon her mouth, either to enjoin silence or to send him a
kiss. D’Artagnan uttered a slight cry of joy; this woman, or rather this
apparition--for the carriage passed with the rapidity of a vision--was
Mme. Bonacieux.

By an involuntary movement and in spite of the injunction given,
d’Artagnan put his horse into a gallop, and in a few strides overtook
the carriage; but the window was hermetically closed, the vision had
disappeared.

D’Artagnan then remembered the injunction: “If you value your own life
or that of those who love you, remain motionless, and as if you had seen
nothing.”

He stopped, therefore, trembling not for himself but for the poor woman
who had evidently exposed herself to great danger by appointing this
rendezvous.

The carriage pursued its way, still going at a great pace, till it
dashed into Paris, and disappeared.

D’Artagnan remained fixed to the spot, astounded and not knowing what to
think. If it was Mme. Bonacieux and if she was returning to Paris, why
this fugitive rendezvous, why this simple exchange of a glance, why this
lost kiss? If, on the other side, it was not she--which was still quite
possible--for the little light that remained rendered a mistake
easy--might it not be the commencement of some plot against him through
the allurement of this woman, for whom his love was known?

His three companions joined him. All had plainly seen a woman’s head
appear at the window, but none of them, except Athos, knew Mme.
Bonacieux. The opinion of Athos was that it was indeed she; but less
preoccupied by that pretty face than d’Artagnan, he had fancied he saw a
second head, a man’s head, inside the carriage.

“If that be the case,” said d’Artagnan, “they are doubtless transporting
her from one prison to another. But what can they intend to do with the
poor creature, and how shall I ever meet her again?”

“Friend,” said Athos, gravely, “remember that it is the dead alone with
whom we are not likely to meet again on this earth. You know something
of that, as well as I do, I think. Now, if your mistress is not dead, if
it is she we have just seen, you will meet with her again some day or
other. And perhaps, my God!” added he, with that misanthropic tone which
was peculiar to him, “perhaps sooner than you wish.”

Half past seven had sounded. The carriage had been twenty minutes behind
the time appointed. D’Artagnan’s friends reminded him that he had a
visit to pay, but at the same time bade him observe that there was yet
time to retract.

But d’Artagnan was at the same time impetuous and curious. He had made
up his mind that he would go to the Palais-Cardinal, and that he would
learn what his Eminence had to say to him. Nothing could turn him from
his purpose.

They reached the Rue St. Honore, and in the Place du Palais-Cardinal
they found the twelve invited Musketeers, walking about in expectation
of their comrades. There only they explained to them the matter in hand.

D’Artagnan was well known among the honorable corps of the king’s
Musketeers, in which it was known he would one day take his place; he
was considered beforehand as a comrade. It resulted from these
antecedents that everyone entered heartily into the purpose for which
they met; besides, it would not be unlikely that they would have an
opportunity of playing either the cardinal or his people an ill turn,
and for such expeditions these worthy gentlemen were always ready.

Athos divided them into three groups, assumed the command of one, gave
the second to Aramis, and the third to Porthos; and then each group went
and took their watch near an entrance.

D’Artagnan, on his part, entered boldly at the principal gate.

Although he felt himself ably supported, the young man was not without a
little uneasiness as he ascended the great staircase, step by step. His
conduct toward Milady bore a strong resemblance to treachery, and he was
very suspicious of the political relations which existed between that
woman and the cardinal. Still further, de Wardes, whom he had treated so
ill, was one of the tools of his Eminence; and d’Artagnan knew that
while his Eminence was terrible to his enemies, he was strongly attached
to his friends.

“If de Wardes has related all our affair to the cardinal, which is not
to be doubted, and if he has recognized me, as is probable, I may
consider myself almost as a condemned man,” said d’Artagnan, shaking his
head. “But why has he waited till now? That’s all plain enough. Milady
has laid her complaints against me with that hypocritical grief which
renders her so interesting, and this last offense has made the cup
overflow.”

“Fortunately,” added he, “my good friends are down yonder, and they will
not allow me to be carried away without a struggle. Nevertheless,
Monsieur de Treville’s company of Musketeers alone cannot maintain a war
against the cardinal, who disposes of the forces of all France, and
before whom the queen is without power and the king without will.
D’Artagnan, my friend, you are brave, you are prudent, you have
excellent qualities; but the women will ruin you!”

He came to this melancholy conclusion as he entered the antechamber. He
placed his letter in the hands of the usher on duty, who led him into
the waiting room and passed on into the interior of the palace.

In this waiting room were five or six of the cardinals Guards, who
recognized d’Artagnan, and knowing that it was he who had wounded
Jussac, they looked upon him with a smile of singular meaning.

This smile appeared to d’Artagnan to be of bad augury. Only, as our
Gascon was not easily intimidated--or rather, thanks to a great pride
natural to the men of his country, he did not allow one easily to see
what was passing in his mind when that which was passing at all
resembled fear--he placed himself haughtily in front of Messieurs the
Guards, and waited with his hand on his hip, in an attitude by no means
deficient in majesty.

The usher returned and made a sign to d’Artagnan to follow him. It
appeared to the young man that the Guards, on seeing him depart,
chuckled among themselves.

He traversed a corridor, crossed a grand saloon, entered a library, and
found himself in the presence of a man seated at a desk and writing.

The usher introduced him, and retired without speaking a word.
D’Artagnan remained standing and examined this man.

D’Artagnan at first believed that he had to do with some judge examining
his papers; but he perceived that the man at the desk wrote, or rather
corrected, lines of unequal length, scanning the words on his fingers.
He saw then that he was with a poet. At the end of an instant the poet
closed his manuscript, upon the cover of which was written “Mirame, a
Tragedy in Five Acts,” and raised his head.

D’Artagnan recognized the cardinal.




40 A TERRIBLE VISION


The cardinal leaned his elbow on his manuscript, his cheek upon his
hand, and looked intently at the young man for a moment. No one had a
more searching eye than the Cardinal de Richelieu, and d’Artagnan felt
this glance run through his veins like a fever.

He however kept a good countenance, holding his hat in his hand and
awaiting the good pleasure of his Eminence, without too much assurance,
but also without too much humility.

“Monsieur,” said the cardinal, “are you a d’Artagnan from Bearn?”

“Yes, monseigneur,” replied the young man.

“There are several branches of the d’Artagnans at Tarbes and in its
environs,” said the cardinal; “to which do you belong?”

“I am the son of him who served in the Religious Wars under the great
King Henry, the father of his gracious Majesty.”

“That is well. It is you who set out seven or eight months ago from your
country to seek your fortune in the capital?”

“Yes, monseigneur.”

“You came through Meung, where something befell you. I don’t very well
know what, but still something.”

“Monseigneur,” said d’Artagnan, “this was what happened to me--”

“Never mind, never mind!” resumed the cardinal, with a smile which
indicated that he knew the story as well as he who wished to relate it.
“You were recommended to Monsieur de Treville, were you not?”

“Yes, monseigneur; but in that unfortunate affair at Meung--”

“The letter was lost,” replied his Eminence; “yes, I know that. But
Monsieur de Treville is a skilled physiognomist, who knows men at first
sight; and he placed you in the company of his brother-in-law, Monsieur
Dessessart, leaving you to hope that one day or other you should enter
the Musketeers.”

“Monseigneur is correctly informed,” said d’Artagnan.

“Since that time many things have happened to you. You were walking one
day behind the Chartreux, when it would have been better if you had been
elsewhere. Then you took with your friends a journey to the waters of
Forges; they stopped on the road, but you continued yours. That is all
very simple: you had business in England.”

“Monseigneur,” said d’Artagnan, quite confused, “I went--”

“Hunting at Windsor, or elsewhere--that concerns nobody. I know, because
it is my office to know everything. On your return you were received by
an august personage, and I perceive with pleasure that you preserve the
souvenir she gave you.”

D’Artagnan placed his hand upon the queen’s diamond, which he wore, and
quickly turned the stone inward; but it was too late.

“The day after that, you received a visit from Cavois,” resumed the
cardinal. “He went to desire you to come to the palace. You have not
returned that visit, and you were wrong.”

“Monseigneur, I feared I had incurred disgrace with your Eminence.”

“How could that be, monsieur? Could you incur my displeasure by having
followed the orders of your superiors with more intelligence and courage
than another would have done? It is the people who do not obey that I
punish, and not those who, like you, obey--but too well. As a proof,
remember the date of the day on which I had you bidden to come to me,
and seek in your memory for what happened to you that very night.”

That was the very evening when the abduction of Mme. Bonacieux took
place. D’Artagnan trembled; and he likewise recollected that during the
past half hour the poor woman had passed close to him, without doubt
carried away by the same power that had caused her disappearance.

“In short,” continued the cardinal, “as I have heard nothing of you for
some time past, I wished to know what you were doing. Besides, you owe
me some thanks. You must yourself have remarked how much you have been
considered in all the circumstances.”

D’Artagnan bowed with respect.

“That,” continued the cardinal, “arose not only from a feeling of
natural equity, but likewise from a plan I have marked out with respect
to you.”

D’Artagnan became more and more astonished.

“I wished to explain this plan to you on the day you received my first
invitation; but you did not come. Fortunately, nothing is lost by this
delay, and you are now about to hear it. Sit down there, before me,
d’Artagnan; you are gentleman enough not to listen standing.” And the
cardinal pointed with his finger to a chair for the young man, who was
so astonished at what was passing that he awaited a second sign from his
interlocutor before he obeyed.

“You are brave, Monsieur d’Artagnan,” continued his Eminence; “you are
prudent, which is still better. I like men of head and heart. Don’t be
afraid,” said he, smiling. “By men of heart I mean men of courage. But
young as you are, and scarcely entering into the world, you have
powerful enemies; if you do not take great heed, they will destroy you.”

“Alas, monseigneur!” replied the young man, “very easily, no doubt, for
they are strong and well supported, while I am alone.”

“Yes, that’s true; but alone as you are, you have done much already, and
will do still more, I don’t doubt. Yet you have need, I believe, to be
guided in the adventurous career you have undertaken; for, if I mistake
not, you came to Paris with the ambitious idea of making your fortune.”

“I am at the age of extravagant hopes, monseigneur,” said d’Artagnan.

“There are no extravagant hopes but for fools, monsieur, and you are a
man of understanding. Now, what would you say to an ensign’s commission
in my Guards, and a company after the campaign?”

“Ah, monseigneur.”

“You accept it, do you not?”

“Monseigneur,” replied d’Artagnan, with an embarrassed air.

“How? You refuse?” cried the cardinal, with astonishment.

“I am in his Majesty’s Guards, monseigneur, and I have no reason to be
dissatisfied.”

“But it appears to me that my Guards--mine--are also his Majesty’s
Guards; and whoever serves in a French corps serves the king.”

“Monseigneur, your Eminence has ill understood my words.”

“You want a pretext, do you not? I comprehend. Well, you have this
excuse: advancement, the opening campaign, the opportunity which I offer
you--so much for the world. As regards yourself, the need of protection;
for it is fit you should know, Monsieur d’Artagnan, that I have received
heavy and serious complaints against you. You do not consecrate your
days and nights wholly to the king’s service.”

D’Artagnan colored.

“In fact,” said the cardinal, placing his hand upon a bundle of papers,
“I have here a whole pile which concerns you. I know you to be a man of
resolution; and your services, well directed, instead of leading you to
ill, might be very advantageous to you. Come; reflect, and decide.”

“Your goodness confounds me, monseigneur,” replied d’Artagnan, “and I am
conscious of a greatness of soul in your Eminence that makes me mean as
an earthworm; but since Monseigneur permits me to speak freely--”

D’Artagnan paused.

“Yes; speak.”

“Then, I will presume to say that all my friends are in the king’s
Musketeers and Guards, and that by an inconceivable fatality my enemies
are in the service of your Eminence; I should, therefore, be ill
received here and ill regarded there if I accepted what Monseigneur
offers me.”

“Do you happen to entertain the haughty idea that I have not yet made
you an offer equal to your value?” asked the cardinal, with a smile of
disdain.

“Monseigneur, your Eminence is a hundred times too kind to me; and on
the contrary, I think I have not proved myself worthy of your goodness.
The siege of La Rochelle is about to be resumed, monseigneur. I shall
serve under the eye of your Eminence, and if I have the good fortune to
conduct myself at the siege in such a manner as merits your attention,
then I shall at least leave behind me some brilliant action to justify
the protection with which you honor me. Everything is best in its time,
monseigneur. Hereafter, perhaps, I shall have the right of giving
myself; at present I shall appear to sell myself.”

“That is to say, you refuse to serve me, monsieur,” said the cardinal,
with a tone of vexation, through which, however, might be seen a sort of
esteem; “remain free, then, and guard your hatreds and your sympathies.”

“Monseigneur--”

“Well, well,” said the cardinal, “I don’t wish you any ill; but you must
be aware that it is quite trouble enough to defend and recompense our
friends. We owe nothing to our enemies; and let me give you a piece of
advice; take care of yourself, Monsieur d’Artagnan, for from the moment
I withdraw my hand from behind you, I would not give an obolus for your
life.”

“I will try to do so, monseigneur,” replied the Gascon, with a noble
confidence.

“Remember at a later period and at a certain moment, if any mischance
should happen to you,” said Richelieu, significantly, “that it was I who
came to seek you, and that I did all in my power to prevent this
misfortune befalling you.”

“I shall entertain, whatever may happen,” said d’Artagnan, placing his
hand upon his breast and bowing, “an eternal gratitude toward your
Eminence for that which you now do for me.”

“Well, let it be, then, as you have said, Monsieur d’Artagnan; we shall
see each other again after the campaign. I will have my eye upon you,
for I shall be there,” replied the cardinal, pointing with his finger to
a magnificent suit of armor he was to wear, “and on our return, well--we
will settle our account!”

“Young man,” said Richelieu, “if I shall be able to say to you at
another time what I have said to you today, I promise you to do so.”

This last expression of Richelieu’s conveyed a terrible doubt; it
alarmed d’Artagnan more than a menace would have done, for it was a
warning. The cardinal, then, was seeking to preserve him from some
misfortune which threatened him. He opened his mouth to reply, but with
a haughty gesture the cardinal dismissed him.

D’Artagnan went out, but at the door his heart almost failed him, and he
felt inclined to return. Then the noble and severe countenance of Athos
crossed his mind; if he made the compact with the cardinal which he
required, Athos would no more give him his hand--Athos would renounce
him.

It was this fear that restrained him, so powerful is the influence of a
truly great character on all that surrounds it.

D’Artagnan descended by the staircase at which he had entered, and found
Athos and the four Musketeers waiting his appearance, and beginning to
grow uneasy. With a word, d’Artagnan reassured them; and Planchet ran to
inform the other sentinels that it was useless to keep guard longer, as
his master had come out safe from the Palais-Cardinal.

Returned home with Athos, Aramis and Porthos inquired eagerly the cause
of the strange interview; but d’Artagnan confined himself to telling
them that M. de Richelieu had sent for him to propose to him to enter
into his guards with the rank of ensign, and that he had refused.

“And you were right,” cried Aramis and Porthos, with one voice.

Athos fell into a profound reverie and answered nothing. But when they
were alone he said, “You have done that which you ought to have done,
d’Artagnan; but perhaps you have been wrong.”

D’Artagnan sighed deeply, for this voice responded to a secret voice of
his soul, which told him that great misfortunes awaited him.

The whole of the next day was spent in preparations for departure.
D’Artagnan went to take leave of M. de Treville. At that time it was
believed that the separation of the Musketeers and the Guards would be
but momentary, the king holding his Parliament that very day and
proposing to set out the day after. M. de Treville contented himself
with asking d’Artagnan if he could do anything for him, but d’Artagnan
answered that he was supplied with all he wanted.

That night brought together all those comrades of the Guards of M.
Dessessart and the company of Musketeers of M. de Treville who had been
accustomed to associate together. They were parting to meet again when
it pleased God, and if it pleased God. That night, then, was somewhat
riotous, as may be imagined. In such cases extreme preoccupation is only
to be combated by extreme carelessness.

At the first sound of the morning trumpet the friends separated; the
Musketeers hastening to the hotel of M. de Treville, the Guards to that
of M. Dessessart. Each of the captains then led his company to the
Louvre, where the king held his review.

The king was dull and appeared ill, which detracted a little from his
usual lofty bearing. In fact, the evening before, a fever had seized him
in the midst of the Parliament, while he was holding his Bed of Justice.
He had, not the less, decided upon setting out that same evening; and in
spite of the remonstrances that had been offered to him, he persisted in
having the review, hoping by setting it at defiance to conquer the
disease which began to lay hold upon him.

The review over, the Guards set forward alone on their march, the
Musketeers waiting for the king, which allowed Porthos time to go and
take a turn in his superb equipment in the Rue aux Ours.

The procurator’s wife saw him pass in his new uniform and on his fine
horse. She loved Porthos too dearly to allow him to part thus; she made
him a sign to dismount and come to her. Porthos was magnificent; his
spurs jingled, his cuirass glittered, his sword knocked proudly against
his ample limbs. This time the clerks evinced no inclination to laugh,
such a real ear clipper did Porthos appear.

The Musketeer was introduced to M. Coquenard, whose little gray eyes
sparkled with anger at seeing his cousin all blazing new. Nevertheless,
one thing afforded him inward consolation; it was expected by everybody
that the campaign would be a severe one. He whispered a hope to himself
that this beloved relative might be killed in the field.

Porthos paid his compliments to M. Coquenard and bade him farewell. M.
Coquenard wished him all sorts of prosperities. As to Mme. Coquenard,
she could not restrain her tears; but no evil impressions were taken
from her grief as she was known to be very much attached to her
relatives, about whom she was constantly having serious disputes with
her husband.

But the real adieux were made in Mme. Coquenard’s chamber; they were
heartrending.

As long as the procurator’s wife could follow him with her eyes, she
waved her handkerchief to him, leaning so far out of the window as to
lead people to believe she wished to precipitate herself. Porthos
received all these attentions like a man accustomed to such
demonstrations, only on turning the corner of the street he lifted his
hat gracefully, and waved it to her as a sign of adieu.

On his part Aramis wrote a long letter. To whom? Nobody knew. Kitty, who
was to set out that evening for Tours, was waiting in the next chamber.

Athos sipped the last bottle of his Spanish wine.

In the meantime d’Artagnan was defiling with his company. Arriving at
the Faubourg St. Antoine, he turned round to look gaily at the Bastille;
but as it was the Bastille alone he looked at, he did not observe
Milady, who, mounted upon a light chestnut horse, designated him with
her finger to two ill-looking men who came close up to the ranks to take
notice of him. To a look of interrogation which they made, Milady
replied by a sign that it was he. Then, certain that there could be no
mistake in the execution of her orders, she started her horse and
disappeared.

The two men followed the company, and on leaving the Faubourg St.
Antoine, mounted two horses properly equipped, which a servant without
livery had waiting for them.




41 THE SEIGE OF LA ROCHELLE


The Siege of La Rochelle was one of the great political events of the
reign of Louis XIII, and one of the great military enterprises of the
cardinal. It is, then, interesting and even necessary that we should say
a few words about it, particularly as many details of this siege are
connected in too important a manner with the story we have undertaken to
relate to allow us to pass it over in silence.

The political plans of the cardinal when he undertook this siege were
extensive. Let us unfold them first, and then pass on to the private
plans which perhaps had not less influence upon his Eminence than the
others.

Of the important cities given up by Henry IV to the Huguenots as places
of safety, there only remained La Rochelle. It became necessary,
therefore, to destroy this last bulwark of Calvinism--a dangerous leaven
with which the ferments of civil revolt and foreign war were constantly
mingling.

Spaniards, Englishmen, and Italian malcontents, adventurers of all
nations, and soldiers of fortune of every sect, flocked at the first
summons under the standard of the Protestants, and organized themselves
like a vast association, whose branches diverged freely over all parts
of Europe.

La Rochelle, which had derived a new importance from the ruin of the
other Calvinist cities, was, then, the focus of dissensions and
ambition. Moreover, its port was the last in the kingdom of France open
to the English, and by closing it against England, our eternal enemy,
the cardinal completed the work of Joan of Arc and the Duc de Guise.

Thus Bassompierre, who was at once Protestant and Catholic--Protestant
by conviction and Catholic as commander of the order of the Holy Ghost;
Bassompierre, who was a German by birth and a Frenchman at heart--in
short, Bassompierre, who had a distinguished command at the siege of La
Rochelle, said, in charging at the head of several other Protestant
nobles like himself, “You will see, gentlemen, that we shall be fools
enough to take La Rochelle.”

And Bassompierre was right. The cannonade of the Isle of Re presaged to
him the dragonnades of the Cevennes; the taking of La Rochelle was the
preface to the revocation of the Edict of Nantes.

We have hinted that by the side of these views of the leveling and
simplifying minister, which belong to history, the chronicler is forced
to recognize the lesser motives of the amorous man and jealous rival.

Richelieu, as everyone knows, had loved the queen. Was this love a
simple political affair, or was it naturally one of those profound
passions which Anne of Austria inspired in those who approached her?
That we are not able to say; but at all events, we have seen, by the
anterior developments of this story, that Buckingham had the advantage
over him, and in two or three circumstances, particularly that of the
diamond studs, had, thanks to the devotedness of the three Musketeers
and the courage and conduct of d’Artagnan, cruelly mystified him.

It was, then, Richelieu’s object, not only to get rid of an enemy of
France, but to avenge himself on a rival; but this vengeance must be
grand and striking and worthy in every way of a man who held in his
hand, as his weapon for combat, the forces of a kingdom.

Richelieu knew that in combating England he combated Buckingham; that in
triumphing over England he triumphed over Buckingham--in short, that in
humiliating England in the eyes of Europe he humiliated Buckingham in
the eyes of the queen.

On his side Buckingham, in pretending to maintain the honor of England,
was moved by interests exactly like those of the cardinal. Buckingham
also was pursuing a private vengeance. Buckingham could not under any
pretense be admitted into France as an ambassador; he wished to enter it
as a conqueror.

It resulted from this that the real stake in this game, which two most
powerful kingdoms played for the good pleasure of two amorous men, was
simply a kind look from Anne of Austria.

The first advantage had been gained by Buckingham. Arriving unexpectedly
in sight of the Isle of Re with ninety vessels and nearly twenty
thousand men, he had surprised the Comte de Toiras, who commanded for
the king in the Isle, and he had, after a bloody conflict, effected his
landing.

Allow us to observe in passing that in this fight perished the Baron de
Chantal; that the Baron de Chantal left a little orphan girl eighteen
months old, and that this little girl was afterward Mme. de Sevigne.

The Comte de Toiras retired into the citadel St. Martin with his
garrison, and threw a hundred men into a little fort called the fort of
La Pree.

This event had hastened the resolutions of the cardinal; and till the
king and he could take the command of the siege of La Rochelle, which
was determined, he had sent Monsieur to direct the first operations, and
had ordered all the troops he could dispose of to march toward the
theater of war. It was of this detachment, sent as a vanguard, that our
friend d’Artagnan formed a part.

The king, as we have said, was to follow as soon as his Bed of Justice
had been held; but on rising from his Bed of Justice on the
twenty-eighth of June, he felt himself attacked by fever. He was,
notwithstanding, anxious to set out; but his illness becoming more
serious, he was forced to stop at Villeroy.

Now, whenever the king halted, the Musketeers halted. It followed that
d’Artagnan, who was as yet purely and simply in the Guards, found
himself, for the time at least, separated from his good friends--Athos,
Porthos, and Aramis. This separation, which was no more than an
unpleasant circumstance, would have certainly become a cause of serious
uneasiness if he had been able to guess by what unknown dangers he was
surrounded.

He, however, arrived without accident in the camp established before La
Rochelle, on the tenth of the month of September of the year 1627.

Everything was in the same state. The Duke of Buckingham and his
English, masters of the Isle of Re, continued to besiege, but without
success, the citadel St. Martin and the fort of La Pree; and hostilities
with La Rochelle had commenced, two or three days before, about a fort
which the Duc d’Angouleme had caused to be constructed near the city.

The Guards, under the command of M. Dessessart, took up their quarters
at the Minimes; but, as we know, d’Artagnan, possessed with ambition to
enter the Musketeers, had formed but few friendships among his comrades,
and he felt himself isolated and given up to his own reflections.

His reflections were not very cheerful. From the time of his arrival in
Paris, he had been mixed up with public affairs; but his own private
affairs had made no great progress, either in love or fortune. As to
love, the only woman he could have loved was Mme. Bonacieux; and Mme.
Bonacieux had disappeared, without his being able to discover what had
become of her. As to fortune, he had made--he, humble as he was--an
enemy of the cardinal; that is to say, of a man before whom trembled the
greatest men of the kingdom, beginning with the king.

That man had the power to crush him, and yet he had not done so. For a
mind so perspicuous as that of d’Artagnan, this indulgence was a light
by which he caught a glimpse of a better future.

Then he had made himself another enemy, less to be feared, he thought;
but nevertheless, he instinctively felt, not to be despised. This enemy
was Milady.

In exchange for all this, he had acquired the protection and good will
of the queen; but the favor of the queen was at the present time an
additional cause of persecution, and her protection, as it was known,
protected badly--as witness Chalais and Mme. Bonacieux.

What he had clearly gained in all this was the diamond, worth five or
six thousand livres, which he wore on his finger; and even this
diamond--supposing that d’Artagnan, in his projects of ambition, wished
to keep it, to make it someday a pledge for the gratitude of the
queen--had not in the meanwhile, since he could not part with it, more
value than the gravel he trod under his feet.

We say the gravel he trod under his feet, for d’Artagnan made these
reflections while walking solitarily along a pretty little road which
led from the camp to the village of Angoutin. Now, these reflections had
led him further than he intended, and the day was beginning to decline
when, by the last ray of the setting sun, he thought he saw the barrel
of a musket glitter from behind a hedge.

D’Artagnan had a quick eye and a prompt understanding. He comprehended
that the musket had not come there of itself, and that he who bore it
had not concealed himself behind a hedge with any friendly intentions.
He determined, therefore, to direct his course as clear from it as he
could when, on the opposite side of the road, from behind a rock, he
perceived the extremity of another musket.

This was evidently an ambuscade.

The young man cast a glance at the first musket and saw, with a certain
degree of inquietude, that it was leveled in his direction; but as soon
as he perceived that the orifice of the barrel was motionless, he threw
himself upon the ground. At the same instant the gun was fired, and he
heard the whistling of a ball pass over his head.

No time was to be lost. D’Artagnan sprang up with a bound, and at the
same instant the ball from the other musket tore up the gravel on the
very spot on the road where he had thrown himself with his face to the
ground.

D’Artagnan was not one of those foolhardy men who seek a ridiculous
death in order that it may be said of them that they did not retreat a
single step. Besides, courage was out of the question here; d’Artagnan
had fallen into an ambush.

“If there is a third shot,” said he to himself, “I am a lost man.”

He immediately, therefore, took to his heels and ran toward the camp,
with the swiftness of the young men of his country, so renowned for
their agility; but whatever might be his speed, the first who fired,
having had time to reload, fired a second shot, and this time so well
aimed that it struck his hat, and carried it ten paces from him.

As he, however, had no other hat, he picked up this as he ran, and
arrived at his quarters very pale and quite out of breath. He sat down
without saying a word to anybody, and began to reflect.

This event might have three causes:

The first and the most natural was that it might be an ambuscade of the
Rochellais, who might not be sorry to kill one of his Majesty’s Guards,
because it would be an enemy the less, and this enemy might have a
well-furnished purse in his pocket.

D’Artagnan took his hat, examined the hole made by the ball, and shook
his head. The ball was not a musket ball--it was an arquebus ball. The
accuracy of the aim had first given him the idea that a special weapon
had been employed. This could not, then, be a military ambuscade, as the
ball was not of the regular caliber.

This might be a kind remembrance of Monsieur the Cardinal. It may be
observed that at the very moment when, thanks to the ray of the sun, he
perceived the gun barrel, he was thinking with astonishment on the
forbearance of his Eminence with respect to him.

But d’Artagnan again shook his head. For people toward whom he had but
to put forth his hand, his Eminence had rarely recourse to such means.

It might be a vengeance of Milady; that was most probable.

He tried in vain to remember the faces or dress of the assassins; he had
escaped so rapidly that he had not had leisure to notice anything.

“Ah, my poor friends!” murmured d’Artagnan; “where are you? And that you
should fail me!”

D’Artagnan passed a very bad night. Three or four times he started up,
imagining that a man was approaching his bed for the purpose of stabbing
him. Nevertheless, day dawned without darkness having brought any
accident.

But d’Artagnan well suspected that that which was deferred was not
relinquished.

D’Artagnan remained all day in his quarters, assigning as a reason to
himself that the weather was bad.

At nine o’clock the next morning, the drums beat to arms. The Duc
d’Orleans visited the posts. The guards were under arms, and d’Artagnan
took his place in the midst of his comrades.

Monsieur passed along the front of the line; then all the superior
officers approached him to pay their compliments, M. Dessessart, captain
of the Guards, as well as the others.

At the expiration of a minute or two, it appeared to d’Artagnan that M.
Dessessart made him a sign to approach. He waited for a fresh gesture on
the part of his superior, for fear he might be mistaken; but this
gesture being repeated, he left the ranks, and advanced to receive
orders.

“Monsieur is about to ask for some men of good will for a dangerous
mission, but one which will do honor to those who shall accomplish it;
and I made you a sign in order that you might hold yourself in
readiness.”

“Thanks, my captain!” replied d’Artagnan, who wished for nothing better
than an opportunity to distinguish himself under the eye of the
lieutenant general.

In fact the Rochellais had made a sortie during the night, and had
retaken a bastion of which the royal army had gained possession two days
before. The matter was to ascertain, by reconnoitering, how the enemy
guarded this bastion.

At the end of a few minutes Monsieur raised his voice, and said, “I want
for this mission three or four volunteers, led by a man who can be
depended upon.”

“As to the man to be depended upon, I have him under my hand, monsieur,”
said M. Dessessart, pointing to d’Artagnan; “and as to the four or five
volunteers, Monsieur has but to make his intentions known, and the men
will not be wanting.”

“Four men of good will who will risk being killed with me!” said
d’Artagnan, raising his sword.

Two of his comrades of the Guards immediately sprang forward, and two
other soldiers having joined them, the number was deemed sufficient.
D’Artagnan declined all others, being unwilling to take the first chance
from those who had the priority.

It was not known whether, after the taking of the bastion, the
Rochellais had evacuated it or left a garrison in it; the object then
was to examine the place near enough to verify the reports.

D’Artagnan set out with his four companions, and followed the trench;
the two Guards marched abreast with him, and the two soldiers followed
behind.

They arrived thus, screened by the lining of the trench, till they came
within a hundred paces of the bastion. There, on turning round,
d’Artagnan perceived that the two soldiers had disappeared.

He thought that, beginning to be afraid, they had stayed behind, and he
continued to advance.

At the turning of the counterscarp they found themselves within about
sixty paces of the bastion. They saw no one, and the bastion seemed
abandoned.

The three composing our forlorn hope were deliberating whether they
should proceed any further, when all at once a circle of smoke enveloped
the giant of stone, and a dozen balls came whistling around d’Artagnan
and his companions.

They knew all they wished to know; the bastion was guarded. A longer
stay in this dangerous spot would have been useless imprudence.
D’Artagnan and his two companions turned their backs, and commenced a
retreat which resembled a flight.

On arriving at the angle of the trench which was to serve them as a
rampart, one of the Guardsmen fell. A ball had passed through his
breast. The other, who was safe and sound, continued his way toward the
camp.

D’Artagnan was not willing to abandon his companion thus, and stooped to
raise him and assist him in regaining the lines; but at this moment two
shots were fired. One ball struck the head of the already-wounded guard,
and the other flattened itself against a rock, after having passed
within two inches of d’Artagnan.

The young man turned quickly round, for this attack could not have come
from the bastion, which was hidden by the angle of the trench. The idea
of the two soldiers who had abandoned him occurred to his mind, and with
them he remembered the assassins of two evenings before. He resolved
this time to know with whom he had to deal, and fell upon the body of
his comrade as if he were dead.

He quickly saw two heads appear above an abandoned work within thirty
paces of him; they were the heads of the two soldiers. D’Artagnan had
not been deceived; these two men had only followed for the purpose of
assassinating him, hoping that the young man’s death would be placed to
the account of the enemy.

As he might be only wounded and might denounce their crime, they came up
to him with the purpose of making sure. Fortunately, deceived by
d’Artagnan’s trick, they neglected to reload their guns.

When they were within ten paces of him, d’Artagnan, who in falling had
taken care not to let go his sword, sprang up close to them.

The assassins comprehended that if they fled toward the camp without
having killed their man, they should be accused by him; therefore their
first idea was to join the enemy. One of them took his gun by the
barrel, and used it as he would a club. He aimed a terrible blow at
d’Artagnan, who avoided it by springing to one side; but by this
movement he left a passage free to the bandit, who darted off toward the
bastion. As the Rochellais who guarded the bastion were ignorant of the
intentions of the man they saw coming toward them, they fired upon him,
and he fell, struck by a ball which broke his shoulder.

Meantime d’Artagnan had thrown himself upon the other soldier, attacking
him with his sword. The conflict was not long; the wretch had nothing to
defend himself with but his discharged arquebus. The sword of the
Guardsman slipped along the barrel of the now-useless weapon, and passed
through the thigh of the assassin, who fell.

D’Artagnan immediately placed the point of his sword at his throat.

“Oh, do not kill me!” cried the bandit. “Pardon, pardon, my officer, and
I will tell you all.”

“Is your secret of enough importance to me to spare your life for it?”
asked the young man, withholding his arm.

“Yes; if you think existence worth anything to a man of twenty, as you
are, and who may hope for everything, being handsome and brave, as you
are.”

“Wretch,” cried d’Artagnan, “speak quickly! Who employed you to
assassinate me?”

“A woman whom I don’t know, but who is called Milady.”

“But if you don’t know this woman, how do you know her name?”

“My comrade knows her, and called her so. It was with him she agreed,
and not with me; he even has in his pocket a letter from that person,
who attaches great importance to you, as I have heard him say.”

“But how did you become concerned in this villainous affair?”

“He proposed to me to undertake it with him, and I agreed.”

“And how much did she give you for this fine enterprise?”

“A hundred louis.”

“Well, come!” said the young man, laughing, “she thinks I am worth
something. A hundred louis? Well, that was a temptation for two wretches
like you. I understand why you accepted it, and I grant you my pardon;
but upon one condition.”

“What is that?” said the soldier, uneasy at perceiving that all was not
over.

“That you will go and fetch me the letter your comrade has in his
pocket.”

“But,” cried the bandit, “that is only another way of killing me. How
can I go and fetch that letter under the fire of the bastion?”

“You must nevertheless make up your mind to go and get it, or I swear
you shall die by my hand.”

“Pardon, monsieur; pity! In the name of that young lady you love, and
whom you perhaps believe dead but who is not!” cried the bandit,
throwing himself upon his knees and leaning upon his hand--for he began
to lose his strength with his blood.

“And how do you know there is a young woman whom I love, and that I
believed that woman dead?” asked d’Artagnan.

“By that letter which my comrade has in his pocket.”

“You see, then,” said d’Artagnan, “that I must have that letter. So no
more delay, no more hesitation; or else whatever may be my repugnance to
soiling my sword a second time with the blood of a wretch like you, I
swear by my faith as an honest man--” and at these words d’Artagnan made
so fierce a gesture that the wounded man sprang up.

“Stop, stop!” cried he, regaining strength by force of terror. “I will
go--I will go!”

D’Artagnan took the soldier’s arquebus, made him go on before him, and
urged him toward his companion by pricking him behind with his sword.

It was a frightful thing to see this wretch, leaving a long track of
blood on the ground he passed over, pale with approaching death, trying
to drag himself along without being seen to the body of his accomplice,
which lay twenty paces from him.

Terror was so strongly painted on his face, covered with a cold sweat,
that d’Artagnan took pity on him, and casting upon him a look of
contempt, “Stop,” said he, “I will show you the difference between a man
of courage and such a coward as you. Stay where you are; I will go
myself.”

And with a light step, an eye on the watch, observing the movements of
the enemy and taking advantage of the accidents of the ground,
d’Artagnan succeeded in reaching the second soldier.

There were two means of gaining his object--to search him on the spot,
or to carry him away, making a buckler of his body, and search him in
the trench.

D’Artagnan preferred the second means, and lifted the assassin onto his
shoulders at the moment the enemy fired.

A slight shock, the dull noise of three balls which penetrated the
flesh, a last cry, a convulsion of agony, proved to d’Artagnan that the
would-be assassin had saved his life.

D’Artagnan regained the trench, and threw the corpse beside the wounded
man, who was as pale as death.

Then he began to search. A leather pocketbook, a purse, in which was
evidently a part of the sum which the bandit had received, with a dice
box and dice, completed the possessions of the dead man.

He left the box and dice where they fell, threw the purse to the wounded
man, and eagerly opened the pocketbook.

Among some unimportant papers he found the following letter, that which
he had sought at the risk of his life:

“Since you have lost sight of that woman and she is now in safety in the
convent, which you should never have allowed her to reach, try, at
least, not to miss the man. If you do, you know that my hand stretches
far, and that you shall pay very dearly for the hundred louis you have
from me.”

No signature. Nevertheless it was plain the letter came from Milady. He
consequently kept it as a piece of evidence, and being in safety behind
the angle of the trench, he began to interrogate the wounded man. He
confessed that he had undertaken with his comrade--the same who was
killed--to carry off a young woman who was to leave Paris by the
Barriere de La Villette; but having stopped to drink at a cabaret, they
had missed the carriage by ten minutes.

“But what were you to do with that woman?” asked d’Artagnan, with
anguish.

“We were to have conveyed her to a hotel in the Place Royale,” said the
wounded man.

“Yes, yes!” murmured d’Artagnan; “that’s the place--Milady’s own
residence!”

Then the young man tremblingly comprehended what a terrible thirst for
vengeance urged this woman on to destroy him, as well as all who loved
him, and how well she must be acquainted with the affairs of the court,
since she had discovered all. There could be no doubt she owed this
information to the cardinal.

But amid all this he perceived, with a feeling of real joy, that the
queen must have discovered the prison in which poor Mme. Bonacieux was
explaining her devotion, and that she had freed her from that prison;
and the letter he had received from the young woman, and her passage
along the road of Chaillot like an apparition, were now explained.

Then also, as Athos had predicted, it became possible to find Mme.
Bonacieux, and a convent was not impregnable.

This idea completely restored clemency to his heart. He turned toward
the wounded man, who had watched with intense anxiety all the various
expressions of his countenance, and holding out his arm to him, said,
“Come, I will not abandon you thus. Lean upon me, and let us return to
the camp.”

“Yes,” said the man, who could scarcely believe in such magnanimity,
“but is it not to have me hanged?”

“You have my word,” said he; “for the second time I give you your life.”

The wounded man sank upon his knees, to again kiss the feet of his
preserver; but d’Artagnan, who had no longer a motive for staying so
near the enemy, abridged the testimonials of his gratitude.

The Guardsman who had returned at the first discharge announced the
death of his four companions. They were therefore much astonished and
delighted in the regiment when they saw the young man come back safe and
sound.

D’Artagnan explained the sword wound of his companion by a sortie which
he improvised. He described the death of the other soldier, and the
perils they had encountered. This recital was for him the occasion of
veritable triumph. The whole army talked of this expedition for a day,
and Monsieur paid him his compliments upon it. Besides this, as every
great action bears its recompense with it, the brave exploit of
d’Artagnan resulted in the restoration of the tranquility he had lost.
In fact, d’Artagnan believed that he might be tranquil, as one of his
two enemies was killed and the other devoted to his interests.

This tranquillity proved one thing--that d’Artagnan did not yet know
Milady.




42 THE ANJOU WINE


After the most disheartening news of the king’s health, a report of his
convalescence began to prevail in the camp; and as he was very anxious
to be in person at the siege, it was said that as soon as he could mount
a horse he would set forward.

Meantime, Monsieur, who knew that from one day to the other he might
expect to be removed from his command by the Duc d’Angouleme, by
Bassompierre, or by Schomberg, who were all eager for his post, did but
little, lost his days in wavering, and did not dare to attempt any great
enterprise to drive the English from the Isle of Re, where they still
besieged the citadel St. Martin and the fort of La Pree, as on their
side the French were besieging La Rochelle.

D’Artagnan, as we have said, had become more tranquil, as always happens
after a past danger, particularly when the danger seems to have
vanished. He only felt one uneasiness, and that was at not hearing any
tidings from his friends.

But one morning at the commencement of the month of November everything
was explained to him by this letter, dated from Villeroy:

M d’Artagnan,

MM Athos, Porthos, and Aramis, after having had an entertainment at my
house and enjoying themselves very much, created such a disturbance that
the provost of the castle, a rigid man, has ordered them to be confined
for some days; but I accomplish the order they have given me by
forwarding to you a dozen bottles of my Anjou wine, with which they are
much pleased. They are desirous that you should drink to their health in
their favorite wine. I have done this, and am, monsieur, with great
respect,

Your very humble and obedient servant,

Godeau, Purveyor of the Musketeers

“That’s all well!” cried d’Artagnan. “They think of me in their
pleasures, as I thought of them in my troubles. Well, I will certainly
drink to their health with all my heart, but I will not drink alone.”

And d’Artagnan went among those Guardsmen with whom he had formed
greater intimacy than with the others, to invite them to enjoy with him
this present of delicious Anjou wine which had been sent him from
Villeroy.

One of the two Guardsmen was engaged that evening, and another the next,
so the meeting was fixed for the day after that.

D’Artagnan, on his return, sent the twelve bottles of wine to the
refreshment room of the Guards, with strict orders that great care
should be taken of it; and then, on the day appointed, as the dinner was
fixed for midday d’Artagnan sent Planchet at nine in the morning to
assist in preparing everything for the entertainment.

Planchet, very proud of being raised to the dignity of landlord, thought
he would make all ready, like an intelligent man; and with this view
called in the assistance of the lackey of one of his master’s guests,
named Fourreau, and the false soldier who had tried to kill d’Artagnan
and who, belonging to no corps, had entered into the service of
d’Artagnan, or rather of Planchet, after d’Artagnan had saved his life.

The hour of the banquet being come, the two guards arrived, took their
places, and the dishes were arranged on the table. Planchet waited,
towel on arm; Fourreau uncorked the bottles; and Brisemont, which was
the name of the convalescent, poured the wine, which was a little shaken
by its journey, carefully into decanters. Of this wine, the first bottle
being a little thick at the bottom, Brisemont poured the lees into a
glass, and d’Artagnan desired him to drink it, for the poor devil had
not yet recovered his strength.

The guests having eaten the soup, were about to lift the first glass of
wine to their lips, when all at once the cannon sounded from Fort Louis
and Fort Neuf. The Guardsmen, imagining this to be caused by some
unexpected attack, either of the besieged or the English, sprang to
their swords. D’Artagnan, not less forward than they, did likewise, and
all ran out, in order to repair to their posts.

But scarcely were they out of the room before they were made aware of
the cause of this noise. Cries of “Live the king! Live the cardinal!”
resounded on every side, and the drums were beaten in all directions.

In short, the king, impatient, as has been said, had come by forced
marches, and had that moment arrived with all his household and a
reinforcement of ten thousand troops. His Musketeers proceeded and
followed him. D’Artagnan, placed in line with his company, saluted with
an expressive gesture his three friends, whose eyes soon discovered him,
and M. de Treville, who detected him at once.

The ceremony of reception over, the four friends were soon in one
another’s arms.

“Pardieu!” cried d’Artagnan, “you could not have arrived in better time;
the dinner cannot have had time to get cold! Can it, gentlemen?” added
the young man, turning to the two Guards, whom he introduced to his
friends.

“Ah, ah!” said Porthos, “it appears we are feasting!”

“I hope,” said Aramis, “there are no women at your dinner.”

“Is there any drinkable wine in your tavern?” asked Athos.

“Well, pardieu! there is yours, my dear friend,” replied d’Artagnan.

“Our wine!” said Athos, astonished.

“Yes, that you sent me.”

“We sent you wine?”

“You know very well--the wine from the hills of Anjou.”

“Yes, I know what brand you are talking about.”

“The wine you prefer.”

“Well, in the absence of champagne and chambertin, you must content
yourselves with that.”

“And so, connoisseurs in wine as we are, we have sent you some Anjou
wine?” said Porthos.

“Not exactly, it is the wine that was sent by your order.”

“On our account?” said the three Musketeers.

“Did you send this wine, Aramis?” said Athos.

“No; and you, Porthos?”

“No; and you, Athos?”

“No!”

“If it was not you, it was your purveyor,” said d’Artagnan.

“Our purveyor!”

“Yes, your purveyor, Godeau--the purveyor of the Musketeers.”

“My faith! never mind where it comes from,” said Porthos, “let us taste
it, and if it is good, let us drink it.”

“No,” said Athos; “don’t let us drink wine which comes from an unknown
source.”

“You are right, Athos,” said d’Artagnan. “Did none of you charge your
purveyor, Godeau, to send me some wine?”

“No! And yet you say he has sent you some as from us?”

“Here is his letter,” said d’Artagnan, and he presented the note to his
comrades.

“This is not his writing!” said Athos. “I am acquainted with it; before
we left Villeroy I settled the accounts of the regiment.”

“A false letter altogether,” said Porthos, “we have not been
disciplined.”

“d’Artagnan,” said Aramis, in a reproachful tone, “how could you believe
that we had made a disturbance?”

D’Artagnan grew pale, and a convulsive trembling shook all his limbs.

“Thou alarmest me!” said Athos, who never used thee and thou but upon
very particular occasions, “what has happened?”

“Look you, my friends!” cried d’Artagnan, “a horrible suspicion crosses
my mind! Can this be another vengeance of that woman?”

It was now Athos who turned pale.

D’Artagnan rushed toward the refreshment room, the three Musketeers and
the two Guards following him.

The first object that met the eyes of d’Artagnan on entering the room
was Brisemont, stretched upon the ground and rolling in horrible
convulsions.

Planchet and Fourreau, as pale as death, were trying to give him succor;
but it was plain that all assistance was useless--all the features of
the dying man were distorted with agony.

“Ah!” cried he, on perceiving d’Artagnan, “ah! this is frightful! You
pretend to pardon me, and you poison me!”

“I!” cried d’Artagnan. “I, wretch? What do you say?”

“I say that it was you who gave me the wine; I say that it was you who
desired me to drink it. I say you wished to avenge yourself on me, and I
say that it is horrible!”

“Do not think so, Brisemont,” said d’Artagnan; “do not think so. I swear
to you, I protest--”

“Oh, but God is above! God will punish you! My God, grant that he may
one day suffer what I suffer!”

“Upon the Gospel,” said d’Artagnan, throwing himself down by the dying
man, “I swear to you that the wine was poisoned and that I was going to
drink of it as you did.”

“I do not believe you,” cried the soldier, and he expired amid horrible
tortures.

“Frightful! frightful!” murmured Athos, while Porthos broke the bottles
and Aramis gave orders, a little too late, that a confessor should be
sent for.

“Oh, my friends,” said d’Artagnan, “you come once more to save my life,
not only mine but that of these gentlemen. Gentlemen,” continued he,
addressing the Guardsmen, “I request you will be silent with regard to
this adventure. Great personages may have had a hand in what you have
seen, and if talked about, the evil would only recoil upon us.”

“Ah, monsieur!” stammered Planchet, more dead than alive, “ah, monsieur,
what an escape I have had!”

“How, sirrah! you were going to drink my wine?”

“To the health of the king, monsieur; I was going to drink a small glass
of it if Fourreau had not told me I was called.”

“Alas!” said Fourreau, whose teeth chattered with terror, “I wanted to
get him out of the way that I might drink myself.”

“Gentlemen,” said d’Artagnan, addressing the Guardsmen, “you may easily
comprehend that such a feast can only be very dull after what has taken
place; so accept my excuses, and put off the party till another day, I
beg of you.”

The two Guardsmen courteously accepted d’Artagnan’s excuses, and
perceiving that the four friends desired to be alone, retired.

When the young Guardsman and the three Musketeers were without
witnesses, they looked at one another with an air which plainly
expressed that each of them perceived the gravity of their situation.

“In the first place,” said Athos, “let us leave this chamber; the dead
are not agreeable company, particularly when they have died a violent
death.”

“Planchet,” said d’Artagnan, “I commit the corpse of this poor devil to
your care. Let him be interred in holy ground. He committed a crime, it
is true; but he repented of it.”

And the four friends quit the room, leaving to Planchet and Fourreau the
duty of paying mortuary honors to Brisemont.

The host gave them another chamber, and served them with fresh eggs and
some water, which Athos went himself to draw at the fountain. In a few
words, Porthos and Aramis were posted as to the situation.

“Well,” said d’Artagnan to Athos, “you see, my dear friend, that this is
war to the death.”

Athos shook his head.

“Yes, yes,” replied he, “I perceive that plainly; but do you really
believe it is she?”

“I am sure of it.”

“Nevertheless, I confess I still doubt.”

“But the fleur-de-lis on her shoulder?”

“She is some Englishwoman who has committed a crime in France, and has
been branded in consequence.”

“Athos, she is your wife, I tell you,” repeated d’Artagnan; “only
reflect how much the two descriptions resemble each other.”

“Yes; but I should think the other must be dead, I hanged her so
effectually.”

It was d’Artagnan who now shook his head in his turn.

“But in either case, what is to be done?” said the young man.

“The fact is, one cannot remain thus, with a sword hanging eternally
over his head,” said Athos. “We must extricate ourselves from this
position.”

“But how?”

“Listen! You must try to see her, and have an explanation with her. Say
to her: ‘Peace or war! My word as a gentleman never to say anything of
you, never to do anything against you; on your side, a solemn oath to
remain neutral with respect to me. If not, I will apply to the
chancellor, I will apply to the king, I will apply to the hangman, I
will move the courts against you, I will denounce you as branded, I will
bring you to trial; and if you are acquitted, well, by the faith of a
gentleman, I will kill you at the corner of some wall, as I would a mad
dog.’”

“I like the means well enough,” said d’Artagnan, “but where and how to
meet with her?”

“Time, dear friend, time brings round opportunity; opportunity is the
martingale of man. The more we have ventured the more we gain, when we
know how to wait.”

“Yes; but to wait surrounded by assassins and poisoners.”

“Bah!” said Athos. “God has preserved us hitherto, God will preserve us
still.”

“Yes, we. Besides, we are men; and everything considered, it is our lot
to risk our lives; but she,” asked he, in an undertone.

“What she?” asked Athos.

“Constance.”

“Madame Bonacieux! Ah, that’s true!” said Athos. “My poor friend, I had
forgotten you were in love.”

“Well, but,” said Aramis, “have you not learned by the letter you found
on the wretched corpse that she is in a convent? One may be very
comfortable in a convent; and as soon as the siege of La Rochelle is
terminated, I promise you on my part--”

“Good,” cried Athos, “good! Yes, my dear Aramis, we all know that your
views have a religious tendency.”

“I am only temporarily a Musketeer,” said Aramis, humbly.

“It is some time since we heard from his mistress,” said Athos, in a low
voice. “But take no notice; we know all about that.”

“Well,” said Porthos, “it appears to me that the means are very simple.”

“What?” asked d’Artagnan.

“You say she is in a convent?” replied Porthos.

“Yes.”

“Very well. As soon as the siege is over, we’ll carry her off from that
convent.”

“But we must first learn what convent she is in.”

“That’s true,” said Porthos.

“But I think I have it,” said Athos. “Don’t you say, dear d’Artagnan,
that it is the queen who has made choice of the convent for her?”

“I believe so, at least.”

“In that case Porthos will assist us.”

“And how so, if you please?”

“Why, by your marchioness, your duchess, your princess. She must have a
long arm.”

“Hush!” said Porthos, placing a finger on his lips. “I believe her to be
a cardinalist; she must know nothing of the matter.”

“Then,” said Aramis, “I take upon myself to obtain intelligence of her.”

“You, Aramis?” cried the three friends. “You! And how?”

“By the queen’s almoner, to whom I am very intimately allied,” said
Aramis, coloring.

And on this assurance, the four friends, who had finished their modest
repast, separated, with the promise of meeting again that evening.
D’Artagnan returned to less important affairs, and the three Musketeers
repaired to the king’s quarters, where they had to prepare their
lodging.




43 THE SIGN OF THE RED DOVECOT


Meanwhile the king, who, with more reason than the cardinal, showed his
hatred for Buckingham, although scarcely arrived was in such a haste to
meet the enemy that he commanded every disposition to be made to drive
the English from the Isle of Re, and afterward to press the siege of La
Rochelle; but notwithstanding his earnest wish, he was delayed by the
dissensions which broke out between MM Bassompierre and Schomberg,
against the Duc d’Angouleme.

MM Bassompierre and Schomberg were marshals of France, and claimed their
right of commanding the army under the orders of the king; but the
cardinal, who feared that Bassompierre, a Huguenot at heart, might press
but feebly the English and Rochellais, his brothers in religion,
supported the Duc d’Angouleme, whom the king, at his instigation, had
named lieutenant general. The result was that to prevent MM Bassompierre
and Schomberg from deserting the army, a separate command had to be
given to each. Bassompierre took up his quarters on the north of the
city, between Leu and Dompierre; the Duc d’Angouleme on the east, from
Dompierre to Perigny; and M. de Schomberg on the south, from Perigny to
Angoutin.

The quarters of Monsieur were at Dompierre; the quarters of the king
were sometimes at Estree, sometimes at Jarrie; the cardinal’s quarters
were upon the downs, at the bridge of La Pierre, in a simple house
without any entrenchment. So that Monsieur watched Bassompierre; the
king, the Duc d’Angouleme; and the cardinal, M. de Schomberg.

As soon as this organization was established, they set about driving the
English from the Isle.

The juncture was favorable. The English, who require, above everything,
good living in order to be good soldiers, only eating salt meat and bad
biscuit, had many invalids in their camp. Still further, the sea, very
rough at this period of the year all along the sea coast, destroyed
every day some little vessel; and the shore, from the point of
l’Aiguillon to the trenches, was at every tide literally covered with
the wrecks of pinnacles, roberges, and feluccas. The result was that
even if the king’s troops remained quietly in their camp, it was evident
that some day or other, Buckingham, who only continued in the Isle from
obstinacy, would be obliged to raise the siege.

But as M. de Toiras gave information that everything was preparing in
the enemy’s camp for a fresh assault, the king judged that it would be
best to put an end to the affair, and gave the necessary orders for a
decisive action.

As it is not our intention to give a journal of the siege, but on the
contrary only to describe such of the events of it as are connected with
the story we are relating, we will content ourselves with saying in two
words that the expedition succeeded, to the great astonishment of the
king and the great glory of the cardinal. The English, repulsed foot by
foot, beaten in all encounters, and defeated in the passage of the Isle
of Loie, were obliged to re-embark, leaving on the field of battle two
thousand men, among whom were five colonels, three lieutenant colonels,
two hundred and fifty captains, twenty gentlemen of rank, four pieces of
cannon, and sixty flags, which were taken to Paris by Claude de St.
Simon, and suspended with great pomp in the arches of Notre Dame.

Te Deums were chanted in camp, and afterward throughout France.

The cardinal was left free to carry on the siege, without having, at
least at the present, anything to fear on the part of the English.

But it must be acknowledged, this response was but momentary. An envoy
of the Duke of Buckingham, named Montague, was taken, and proof was
obtained of a league between the German Empire, Spain, England, and
Lorraine. This league was directed against France.

Still further, in Buckingham’s lodging, which he had been forced to
abandon more precipitately than he expected, papers were found which
confirmed this alliance and which, as the cardinal asserts in his
memoirs, strongly compromised Mme. de Chevreuse and consequently the
queen.

It was upon the cardinal that all the responsibility fell, for one is
not a despotic minister without responsibility. All, therefore, of the
vast resources of his genius were at work night and day, engaged in
listening to the least report heard in any of the great kingdoms of
Europe.

The cardinal was acquainted with the activity, and more particularly the
hatred, of Buckingham. If the league which threatened France triumphed,
all his influence would be lost. Spanish policy and Austrian policy
would have their representatives in the cabinet of the Louvre, where
they had as yet but partisans; and he, Richelieu--the French minister,
the national minister--would be ruined. The king, even while obeying him
like a child, hated him as a child hates his master, and would abandon
him to the personal vengeance of Monsieur and the queen. He would then
be lost, and France, perhaps, with him. All this must be prepared
against.

Courtiers, becoming every instant more numerous, succeeded one another,
day and night, in the little house of the bridge of La Pierre, in which
the cardinal had established his residence.

There were monks who wore the frock with such an ill grace that it was
easy to perceive they belonged to the church militant; women a little
inconvenienced by their costume as pages and whose large trousers could
not entirely conceal their rounded forms; and peasants with blackened
hands but with fine limbs, savoring of the man of quality a league off.

There were also less agreeable visits--for two or three times reports
were spread that the cardinal had nearly been assassinated.

It is true that the enemies of the cardinal said that it was he himself
who set these bungling assassins to work, in order to have, if wanted,
the right of using reprisals; but we must not believe everything
ministers say, nor everything their enemies say.

These attempts did not prevent the cardinal, to whom his most inveterate
detractors have never denied personal bravery, from making nocturnal
excursions, sometimes to communicate to the Duc d’Angouleme important
orders, sometimes to confer with the king, and sometimes to have an
interview with a messenger whom he did not wish to see at home.

On their part the Musketeers, who had not much to do with the siege,
were not under very strict orders and led a joyous life. This was the
more easy for our three companions in particular; for being friends of
M. de Treville, they obtained from him special permission to be absent
after the closing of the camp.

Now, one evening when d’Artagnan, who was in the trenches, was not able
to accompany them, Athos, Porthos, and Aramis, mounted on their battle
steeds, enveloped in their war cloaks, with their hands upon their
pistol butts, were returning from a drinking place called the Red
Dovecot, which Athos had discovered two days before upon the route to
Jarrie, following the road which led to the camp and quite on their
guard, as we have stated, for fear of an ambuscade, when, about a
quarter of a league from the village of Boisnau, they fancied they heard
the sound of horses approaching them. They immediately all three halted,
closed in, and waited, occupying the middle of the road. In an instant,
and as the moon broke from behind a cloud, they saw at a turning of the
road two horsemen who, on perceiving them, stopped in their turn,
appearing to deliberate whether they should continue their route or go
back. The hesitation created some suspicion in the three friends, and
Athos, advancing a few paces in front of the others, cried in a firm
voice, “Who goes there?”

“Who goes there, yourselves?” replied one of the horsemen.

“That is not an answer,” replied Athos. “Who goes there? Answer, or we
charge.”

“Beware of what you are about, gentlemen!” said a clear voice which
seemed accustomed to command.

“It is some superior officer making his night rounds,” said Athos. “What
do you wish, gentlemen?”

“Who are you?” said the same voice, in the same commanding tone. “Answer
in your turn, or you may repent of your disobedience.”

“King’s Musketeers,” said Athos, more and more convinced that he who
interrogated them had the right to do so.

“What company?”

“Company of Treville.”

“Advance, and give an account of what you are doing here at this hour.”

The three companions advanced rather humbly--for all were now convinced
that they had to do with someone more powerful than themselves--leaving
Athos the post of speaker.

One of the two riders, he who had spoken second, was ten paces in front
of his companion. Athos made a sign to Porthos and Aramis also to remain
in the rear, and advanced alone.

“Your pardon, my officer,” said Athos; “but we were ignorant with whom
we had to do, and you may see that we were keeping good guard.”

“Your name?” said the officer, who covered a part of his face with his
cloak.

“But yourself, monsieur,” said Athos, who began to be annoyed by this
inquisition, “give me, I beg you, the proof that you have the right to
question me.”

“Your name?” repeated the cavalier a second time, letting his cloak
fall, and leaving his face uncovered.

“Monsieur the Cardinal!” cried the stupefied Musketeer.

“Your name?” cried his Eminence, for the third time.

“Athos,” said the Musketeer.

The cardinal made a sign to his attendant, who drew near. “These three
Musketeers shall follow us,” said he, in an undertone. “I am not willing
it should be known I have left the camp; and if they follow us we shall
be certain they will tell nobody.”

“We are gentlemen, monseigneur,” said Athos; “require our parole, and
give yourself no uneasiness. Thank God, we can keep a secret.”

The cardinal fixed his piercing eyes on this courageous speaker.

“You have a quick ear, Monsieur Athos,” said the cardinal; “but now
listen to this. It is not from mistrust that I request you to follow me,
but for my security. Your companions are no doubt Messieurs Porthos and
Aramis.”

“Yes, your Eminence,” said Athos, while the two Musketeers who had
remained behind advanced hat in hand.

“I know you, gentlemen,” said the cardinal, “I know you. I know you are
not quite my friends, and I am sorry you are not so; but I know you are
brave and loyal gentlemen, and that confidence may be placed in you.
Monsieur Athos, do me, then, the honor to accompany me; you and your two
friends, and then I shall have an escort to excite envy in his Majesty,
if we should meet him.”

The three Musketeers bowed to the necks of their horses.

“Well, upon my honor,” said Athos, “your Eminence is right in taking us
with you; we have seen several ill-looking faces on the road, and we
have even had a quarrel at the Red Dovecot with four of those faces.”

“A quarrel, and what for, gentlemen?” said the cardinal; “you know I
don’t like quarrelers.”

“And that is the reason why I have the honor to inform your Eminence of
what has happened; for you might learn it from others, and upon a false
account believe us to be in fault.”

“What have been the results of your quarrel?” said the cardinal,
knitting his brow.

“My friend, Aramis, here, has received a slight sword wound in the arm,
but not enough to prevent him, as your Eminence may see, from mounting
to the assault tomorrow, if your Eminence orders an escalade.”

“But you are not the men to allow sword wounds to be inflicted upon you
thus,” said the cardinal. “Come, be frank, gentlemen, you have settled
accounts with somebody! Confess; you know I have the right of giving
absolution.”

“I, monseigneur?” said Athos. “I did not even draw my sword, but I took
him who offended me round the body, and threw him out of the window. It
appears that in falling,” continued Athos, with some hesitation, “he
broke his thigh.”

“Ah, ah!” said the cardinal; “and you, Monsieur Porthos?”

“I, monseigneur, knowing that dueling is prohibited--I seized a bench,
and gave one of those brigands such a blow that I believe his shoulder
is broken.”

“Very well,” said the cardinal; “and you, Monsieur Aramis?”

“Monseigneur, being of a very mild disposition, and being, likewise, of
which Monseigneur perhaps is not aware, about to enter into orders, I
endeavored to appease my comrades, when one of these wretches gave me a
wound with a sword, treacherously, across my left arm. Then I admit my
patience failed me; I drew my sword in my turn, and as he came back to
the charge, I fancied I felt that in throwing himself upon me, he let it
pass through his body. I only know for a certainty that he fell; and it
seemed to me that he was borne away with his two companions.”

“The devil, gentlemen!” said the cardinal, “three men placed hors de
combat in a cabaret squabble! You don’t do your work by halves. And pray
what was this quarrel about?”

“These fellows were drunk,” said Athos, “and knowing there was a lady
who had arrived at the cabaret this evening, they wanted to force her
door.”

“Force her door!” said the cardinal, “and for what purpose?”

“To do her violence, without doubt,” said Athos. “I have had the honor
of informing your Eminence that these men were drunk.”

“And was this lady young and handsome?” asked the cardinal, with a
certain degree of anxiety.

“We did not see her, monseigneur,” said Athos.

“You did not see her? Ah, very well,” replied the cardinal, quickly.
“You did well to defend the honor of a woman; and as I am going to the
Red Dovecot myself, I shall know if you have told me the truth.”

“Monseigneur,” said Athos, haughtily, “we are gentlemen, and to save our
heads we would not be guilty of a falsehood.”

“Therefore I do not doubt what you say, Monsieur Athos, I do not doubt
it for a single instant; but,” added he, “to change the conversation,
was this lady alone?”

“The lady had a cavalier shut up with her,” said Athos, “but as
notwithstanding the noise, this cavalier did not show himself, it is to
be presumed that he is a coward.”

“‘Judge not rashly’, says the Gospel,” replied the cardinal.

Athos bowed.

“And now, gentlemen, that’s well,” continued the cardinal. “I know what
I wish to know; follow me.”

The three Musketeers passed behind his Eminence, who again enveloped his
face in his cloak, and put his horse in motion, keeping from eight to
ten paces in advance of his four companions.

They soon arrived at the silent, solitary inn. No doubt the host knew
what illustrious visitor was expected, and had consequently sent
intruders out of the way.

Ten paces from the door the cardinal made a sign to his esquire and the
three Musketeers to halt. A saddled horse was fastened to the window
shutter. The cardinal knocked three times, and in a peculiar manner.

A man, enveloped in a cloak, came out immediately, and exchanged some
rapid words with the cardinal; after which he mounted his horse, and set
off in the direction of Surgeres, which was likewise the way to Paris.

“Advance, gentlemen,” said the cardinal.

“You have told me the truth, my gentlemen,” said he, addressing the
Musketeers, “and it will not be my fault if our encounter this evening
be not advantageous to you. In the meantime, follow me.”

The cardinal alighted; the three Musketeers did likewise. The cardinal
threw the bridle of his horse to his esquire; the three Musketeers
fastened the horses to the shutters.

The host stood at the door. For him, the cardinal was only an officer
coming to visit a lady.

“Have you any chamber on the ground floor where these gentlemen can wait
near a good fire?” said the cardinal.

The host opened the door of a large room, in which an old stove had just
been replaced by a large and excellent chimney.

“I have this,” said he.

“That will do,” replied the cardinal. “Enter, gentlemen, and be kind
enough to wait for me; I shall not be more than half an hour.”

And while the three Musketeers entered the ground floor room, the
cardinal, without asking further information, ascended the staircase
like a man who has no need of having his road pointed out to him.




44 THE UTILITY OF STOVEPIPES


It was evident that without suspecting it, and actuated solely by their
chivalrous and adventurous character, our three friends had just
rendered a service to someone the cardinal honored with his special
protection.

Now, who was that someone? That was the question the three Musketeers
put to one another. Then, seeing that none of their replies could throw
any light on the subject, Porthos called the host and asked for dice.

Porthos and Aramis placed themselves at the table and began to play.
Athos walked about in a contemplative mood.

While thinking and walking, Athos passed and repassed before the pipe of
the stove, broken in halves, the other extremity passing into the
chamber above; and every time he passed and repassed he heard a murmur
of words, which at length fixed his attention. Athos went close to it,
and distinguished some words that appeared to merit so great an interest
that he made a sign to his friends to be silent, remaining himself bent
with his ear directed to the opening of the lower orifice.

“Listen, Milady,” said the cardinal, “the affair is important. Sit down,
and let us talk it over.”

“Milady!” murmured Athos.

“I listen to your Eminence with greatest attention,” replied a female
voice which made the Musketeer start.

“A small vessel with an English crew, whose captain is on my side,
awaits you at the mouth of Charente, at Fort La Pointe*. He will set
sail tomorrow morning.”

    _*Fort La Pointe, or Fort Vasou, was not built until 1672,
            nearly 50 years later._

“I must go thither tonight?”

“Instantly! That is to say, when you have received my instructions. Two
men, whom you will find at the door on going out, will serve you as
escort. You will allow me to leave first; then, after half an hour, you
can go away in your turn.”

“Yes, monseigneur. Now let us return to the mission with which you wish
to charge me; and as I desire to continue to merit the confidence of
your Eminence, deign to unfold it to me in terms clear and precise, that
I may not commit an error.”

There was an instant of profound silence between the two interlocutors.
It was evident that the cardinal was weighing beforehand the terms in
which he was about to speak, and that Milady was collecting all her
intellectual faculties to comprehend the things he was about to say, and
to engrave them in her memory when they should be spoken.

Athos took advantage of this moment to tell his two companions to fasten
the door inside, and to make them a sign to come and listen with him.

The two Musketeers, who loved their ease, brought a chair for each of
themselves and one for Athos. All three then sat down with their heads
together and their ears on the alert.

“You will go to London,” continued the cardinal. “Arrived in London, you
will seek Buckingham.”

“I must beg your Eminence to observe,” said Milady, “that since the
affair of the diamond studs, about which the duke always suspected me,
his Grace distrusts me.”

“Well, this time,” said the cardinal, “it is not necessary to steal his
confidence, but to present yourself frankly and loyally as a
negotiator.”

“Frankly and loyally,” repeated Milady, with an unspeakable expression
of duplicity.

“Yes, frankly and loyally,” replied the cardinal, in the same tone. “All
this negotiation must be carried on openly.”

“I will follow your Eminence’s instructions to the letter. I only wait
till you give them.”

“You will go to Buckingham in my behalf, and you will tell him I am
acquainted with all the preparations he has made; but that they give me
no uneasiness, since at the first step he takes I will ruin the queen.”

“Will he believe that your Eminence is in a position to accomplish the
threat thus made?”

“Yes; for I have the proofs.”

“I must be able to present these proofs for his appreciation.”

“Without doubt. And you will tell him I will publish the report of
Bois-Robert and the Marquis de Beautru, upon the interview which the
duke had at the residence of Madame the Constable with the queen on the
evening Madame the Constable gave a masquerade. You will tell him, in
order that he may not doubt, that he came there in the costume of the
Great Mogul, which the Chevalier de Guise was to have worn, and that he
purchased this exchange for the sum of three thousand pistoles.”

“Well, monseigneur?”

“All the details of his coming into and going out of the palace--on the
night when he introduced himself in the character of an Italian fortune
teller--you will tell him, that he may not doubt the correctness of my
information; that he had under his cloak a large white robe dotted with
black tears, death’s heads, and crossbones--for in case of a surprise,
he was to pass for the phantom of the White Lady who, as all the world
knows, appears at the Louvre every time any great event is impending.”

“Is that all, monseigneur?”

“Tell him also that I am acquainted with all the details of the
adventure at Amiens; that I will have a little romance made of it,
wittily turned, with a plan of the garden and portraits of the principal
actors in that nocturnal romance.”

“I will tell him that.”

“Tell him further that I hold Montague in my power; that Montague is in
the Bastille; that no letters were found upon him, it is true, but that
torture may make him tell much of what he knows, and even what he does
not know.”

“Exactly.”

“Then add that his Grace has, in the precipitation with which he quit
the Isle of Re, forgotten and left behind him in his lodging a certain
letter from Madame de Chevreuse which singularly compromises the queen,
inasmuch as it proves not only that her Majesty can love the enemies of
the king but that she can conspire with the enemies of France. You
recollect perfectly all I have told you, do you not?”

“Your Eminence will judge: the ball of Madame the Constable; the night
at the Louvre; the evening at Amiens; the arrest of Montague; the letter
of Madame de Chevreuse.”

“That’s it,” said the cardinal, “that’s it. You have an excellent
memory, Milady.”

“But,” resumed she to whom the cardinal addressed this flattering
compliment, “if, in spite of all these reasons, the duke does not give
way and continues to menace France?”

“The duke is in love to madness, or rather to folly,” replied Richelieu,
with great bitterness. “Like the ancient paladins, he has only
undertaken this war to obtain a look from his lady love. If he becomes
certain that this war will cost the honor, and perhaps the liberty, of
the lady of his thoughts, as he says, I will answer for it he will look
twice.”

“And yet,” said Milady, with a persistence that proved she wished to see
clearly to the end of the mission with which she was about to be
charged, “if he persists?”

“If he persists?” said the cardinal. “That is not probable.”

“It is possible,” said Milady.

“If he persists--” His Eminence made a pause, and resumed: “If he
persists--well, then I shall hope for one of those events which change
the destinies of states.”

“If your Eminence would quote to me some one of these events in
history,” said Milady, “perhaps I should partake of your confidence as
to the future.”

“Well, here, for example,” said Richelieu: “when, in 1610, for a cause
similar to that which moves the duke, King Henry IV, of glorious memory,
was about, at the same time, to invade Flanders and Italy, in order to
attack Austria on both sides. Well, did there not happen an event which
saved Austria? Why should not the king of France have the same chance as
the emperor?”

“Your Eminence means, I presume, the knife stab in the Rue de la
Feronnerie?”

“Precisely,” said the cardinal.

“Does not your Eminence fear that the punishment inflicted upon
Ravaillac may deter anyone who might entertain the idea of imitating
him?”

“There will be, in all times and in all countries, particularly if
religious divisions exist in those countries, fanatics who ask nothing
better than to become martyrs. Ay, and observe--it just occurs to me
that the Puritans are furious against Buckingham, and their preachers
designate him as the Antichrist.”

“Well?” said Milady.

“Well,” continued the cardinal, in an indifferent tone, “the only thing
to be sought for at this moment is some woman, handsome, young, and
clever, who has cause of quarrel with the duke. The duke has had many
affairs of gallantry; and if he has fostered his amours by promises of
eternal constancy, he must likewise have sown the seeds of hatred by his
eternal infidelities.”

“No doubt,” said Milady, coolly, “such a woman may be found.”

“Well, such a woman, who would place the knife of Jacques Clement or of
Ravaillac in the hands of a fanatic, would save France.”

“Yes; but she would then be the accomplice of an assassination.”

“Were the accomplices of Ravaillac or of Jacques Clement ever known?”

“No; for perhaps they were too high-placed for anyone to dare look for
them where they were. The Palace of Justice would not be burned down for
everybody, monseigneur.”

“You think, then, that the fire at the Palace of Justice was not caused
by chance?” asked Richelieu, in the tone with which he would have put a
question of no importance.

“I, monseigneur?” replied Milady. “I think nothing; I quote a fact, that
is all. Only I say that if I were named Madame de Montpensier, or the
Queen Marie de Medicis, I should use less precautions than I take, being
simply called Milady Clarik.”

“That is just,” said Richelieu. “What do you require, then?”

“I require an order which would ratify beforehand all that I should
think proper to do for the greatest good of France.”

“But in the first place, this woman I have described must be found who
is desirous of avenging herself upon the duke.”

“She is found,” said Milady.

“Then the miserable fanatic must be found who will serve as an
instrument of God’s justice.”

“He will be found.”

“Well,” said the cardinal, “then it will be time to claim the order
which you just now required.”

“Your Eminence is right,” replied Milady; “and I have been wrong in
seeing in the mission with which you honor me anything but that which it
really is--that is, to announce to his Grace, on the part of your
Eminence, that you are acquainted with the different disguises by means
of which he succeeded in approaching the queen during the fete given by
Madame the Constable; that you have proofs of the interview granted at
the Louvre by the queen to a certain Italian astrologer who was no other
than the Duke of Buckingham; that you have ordered a little romance of a
satirical nature to be written upon the adventures of Amiens, with a
plan of the gardens in which those adventures took place, and portraits
of the actors who figured in them; that Montague is in the Bastille, and
that the torture may make him say things he remembers, and even things
he has forgotten; that you possess a certain letter from Madame de
Chevreuse, found in his Grace’s lodging, which singularly compromises
not only her who wrote it, but her in whose name it was written. Then,
if he persists, notwithstanding all this--as that is, as I have said,
the limit of my mission--I shall have nothing to do but to pray God to
work a miracle for the salvation of France. That is it, is it not,
monseigneur, and I shall have nothing else to do?”

“That is it,” replied the cardinal, dryly.

“And now,” said Milady, without appearing to remark the change of the
duke’s tone toward her--“now that I have received the instructions of
your Eminence as concerns your enemies, Monseigneur will permit me to
say a few words to him of mine?”

“Have you enemies, then?” asked Richelieu.

“Yes, monseigneur, enemies against whom you owe me all your support, for
I made them by serving your Eminence.”

“Who are they?” replied the duke.

“In the first place, there is a little intrigante named Bonacieux.”

“She is in the prison of Nantes.”

“That is to say, she was there,” replied Milady; “but the queen has
obtained an order from the king by means of which she has been conveyed
to a convent.”

“To a convent?” said the duke.

“Yes, to a convent.”

“And to which?”

“I don’t know; the secret has been well kept.”

“But I will know!”

“And your Eminence will tell me in what convent that woman is?”

“I can see nothing inconvenient in that,” said the cardinal.

“Well, now I have an enemy much more to be dreaded by me than this
little Madame Bonacieux.”

“Who is that?”

“Her lover.”

“What is his name?”

“Oh, your Eminence knows him well,” cried Milady, carried away by her
anger. “He is the evil genius of both of us. It is he who in an
encounter with your Eminence’s Guards decided the victory in favor of
the king’s Musketeers; it is he who gave three desperate wounds to de
Wardes, your emissary, and who caused the affair of the diamond studs to
fail; it is he who, knowing it was I who had Madame Bonacieux carried
off, has sworn my death.”

“Ah, ah!” said the cardinal, “I know of whom you speak.”

“I mean that miserable d’Artagnan.”

“He is a bold fellow,” said the cardinal.

“And it is exactly because he is a bold fellow that he is the more to be
feared.”

“I must have,” said the duke, “a proof of his connection with
Buckingham.”

“A proof?” cried Milady; “I will have ten.”

“Well, then, it becomes the simplest thing in the world; get me that
proof, and I will send him to the Bastille.”

“So far good, monseigneur; but afterwards?”

“When once in the Bastille, there is no afterward!” said the cardinal,
in a low voice. “Ah, pardieu!” continued he, “if it were as easy for me
to get rid of my enemy as it is easy to get rid of yours, and if it were
against such people you require impunity--”

“Monseigneur,” replied Milady, “a fair exchange. Life for life, man for
man; give me one, I will give you the other.”

“I don’t know what you mean, nor do I even desire to know what you
mean,” replied the cardinal; “but I wish to please you, and see nothing
out of the way in giving you what you demand with respect to so infamous
a creature--the more so as you tell me this d’Artagnan is a libertine, a
duelist, and a traitor.”

“An infamous scoundrel, monseigneur, a scoundrel!”

“Give me paper, a quill, and some ink, then,” said the cardinal.

“Here they are, monseigneur.”

There was a moment of silence, which proved that the cardinal was
employed in seeking the terms in which he should write the note, or else
in writing it. Athos, who had not lost a word of the conversation, took
his two companions by the hand, and led them to the other end of the
room.

“Well,” said Porthos, “what do you want, and why do you not let us
listen to the end of the conversation?”

“Hush!” said Athos, speaking in a low voice. “We have heard all it was
necessary we should hear; besides, I don’t prevent you from listening,
but I must be gone.”

“You must be gone!” said Porthos; “and if the cardinal asks for you,
what answer can we make?”

“You will not wait till he asks; you will speak first, and tell him that
I am gone on the lookout, because certain expressions of our host have
given me reason to think the road is not safe. I will say two words
about it to the cardinal’s esquire likewise. The rest concerns myself;
don’t be uneasy about that.”

“Be prudent, Athos,” said Aramis.

“Be easy on that head,” replied Athos; “you know I am cool enough.”

Porthos and Aramis resumed their places by the stovepipe.

As to Athos, he went out without any mystery, took his horse, which was
tied with those of his friends to the fastenings of the shutters, in
four words convinced the attendant of the necessity of a vanguard for
their return, carefully examined the priming of his pistols, drew his
sword, and took, like a forlorn hope, the road to the camp.




45 A CONJUGAL SCENE


As Athos had foreseen, it was not long before the cardinal came down. He
opened the door of the room in which the Musketeers were, and found
Porthos playing an earnest game of dice with Aramis. He cast a rapid
glance around the room, and perceived that one of his men was missing.

“What has become of Monseigneur Athos?” asked he.

“Monseigneur,” replied Porthos, “he has gone as a scout, on account of
some words of our host, which made him believe the road was not safe.”

“And you, what have you done, Monsieur Porthos?”

“I have won five pistoles of Aramis.”

“Well; now will you return with me?”

“We are at your Eminence’s orders.”

“To horse, then, gentlemen; for it is getting late.”

The attendant was at the door, holding the cardinal’s horse by the
bridle. At a short distance a group of two men and three horses appeared
in the shade. These were the two men who were to conduct Milady to Fort
La Pointe, and superintend her embarkation.

The attendant confirmed to the cardinal what the two Musketeers had
already said with respect to Athos. The cardinal made an approving
gesture, and retraced his route with the same precautions he had used
incoming.

Let us leave him to follow the road to the camp protected by his esquire
and the two Musketeers, and return to Athos.

For a hundred paces he maintained the speed at which he started; but
when out of sight he turned his horse to the right, made a circuit, and
came back within twenty paces of a high hedge to watch the passage of
the little troop. Having recognized the laced hats of his companions and
the golden fringe of the cardinal’s cloak, he waited till the horsemen
had turned the angle of the road, and having lost sight of them, he
returned at a gallop to the inn, which was opened to him without
hesitation.

The host recognized him.

“My officer,” said Athos, “has forgotten to give a piece of very
important information to the lady, and has sent me back to repair his
forgetfulness.”

“Go up,” said the host; “she is still in her chamber.”

Athos availed himself of the permission, ascended the stairs with his
lightest step, gained the landing, and through the open door perceived
Milady putting on her hat.

He entered the chamber and closed the door behind him. At the noise he
made in pushing the bolt, Milady turned round.

Athos was standing before the door, enveloped in his cloak, with his hat
pulled down over his eyes. On seeing this figure, mute and immovable as
a statue, Milady was frightened.

“Who are you, and what do you want?” cried she.

“Humph,” murmured Athos, “it is certainly she!”

And letting fall his cloak and raising his hat, he advanced toward
Milady.

“Do you know me, madame?” said he.

Milady made one step forward, and then drew back as if she had seen a
serpent.

“So far, well,” said Athos, “I perceive you know me.”

“The Comte de la Fere!” murmured Milady, becoming exceedingly pale, and
drawing back till the wall prevented her from going any farther.

“Yes, Milady,” replied Athos; “the Comte de la Fere in person, who comes
expressly from the other world to have the pleasure of paying you a
visit. Sit down, madame, and let us talk, as the cardinal said.”

Milady, under the influence of inexpressible terror, sat down without
uttering a word.

“You certainly are a demon sent upon the earth!” said Athos. “Your power
is great, I know; but you also know that with the help of God men have
often conquered the most terrible demons. You have once before thrown
yourself in my path. I thought I had crushed you, madame; but either I
was deceived or hell has resuscitated you!”

Milady at these words, which recalled frightful remembrances, hung down
her head with a suppressed groan.

“Yes, hell has resuscitated you,” continued Athos. “Hell has made you
rich, hell has given you another name, hell has almost made you another
face; but it has neither effaced the stains from your soul nor the brand
from your body.”

Milady arose as if moved by a powerful spring, and her eyes flashed
lightning. Athos remained sitting.

“You believed me to be dead, did you not, as I believed you to be? And
the name of Athos as well concealed the Comte de la Fere, as the name
Milady Clarik concealed Anne de Breuil. Was it not so you were called
when your honored brother married us? Our position is truly a strange
one,” continued Athos, laughing. “We have only lived up to the present
time because we believed each other dead, and because a remembrance is
less oppressive than a living creature, though a remembrance is
sometimes devouring.”

“But,” said Milady, in a hollow, faint voice, “what brings you back to
me, and what do you want with me?”

“I wish to tell you that though remaining invisible to your eyes, I have
not lost sight of you.”

“You know what I have done?”

“I can relate to you, day by day, your actions from your entrance to the
service of the cardinal to this evening.”

A smile of incredulity passed over the pale lips of Milady.

“Listen! It was you who cut off the two diamond studs from the shoulder
of the Duke of Buckingham; it was you had the Madame Bonacieux carried
off; it was you who, in love with de Wardes and thinking to pass the
night with him, opened the door to Monsieur d’Artagnan; it was you who,
believing that de Wardes had deceived you, wished to have him killed by
his rival; it was you who, when this rival had discovered your infamous
secret, wished to have him killed in his turn by two assassins, whom you
sent in pursuit of him; it was you who, finding the balls had missed
their mark, sent poisoned wine with a forged letter, to make your victim
believe that the wine came from his friends. In short, it was you who
have but now in this chamber, seated in this chair I now fill, made an
engagement with Cardinal Richelieu to cause the Duke of Buckingham to be
assassinated, in exchange for the promise he has made you to allow you
to assassinate d’Artagnan.”

Milady was livid.

“You must be Satan!” cried she.

“Perhaps,” said Athos; “But at all events listen well to this.
Assassinate the Duke of Buckingham, or cause him to be assassinated--I
care very little about that! I don’t know him. Besides, he is an
Englishman. But do not touch with the tip of your finger a single hair
of d’Artagnan, who is a faithful friend whom I love and defend, or I
swear to you by the head of my father the crime which you shall have
endeavored to commit, or shall have committed, shall be the last.”

“Monsieur d’Artagnan has cruelly insulted me,” said Milady, in a hollow
tone; “Monsieur d’Artagnan shall die!”

“Indeed! Is it possible to insult you, madame?” said Athos, laughing;
“he has insulted you, and he shall die!”

“He shall die!” replied Milady; “she first, and he afterward.”

Athos was seized with a kind of vertigo. The sight of this creature, who
had nothing of the woman about her, recalled awful remembrances. He
thought how one day, in a less dangerous situation than the one in which
he was now placed, he had already endeavored to sacrifice her to his
honor. His desire for blood returned, burning his brain and pervading
his frame like a raging fever; he arose in his turn, reached his hand to
his belt, drew forth a pistol, and cocked it.

Milady, pale as a corpse, endeavored to cry out; but her swollen tongue
could utter no more than a hoarse sound which had nothing human in it
and resembled the rattle of a wild beast. Motionless against the dark
tapestry, with her hair in disorder, she appeared like a horrid image of
terror.

Athos slowly raised his pistol, stretched out his arm so that the weapon
almost touched Milady’s forehead, and then, in a voice the more terrible
from having the supreme calmness of a fixed resolution, “Madame,” said
he, “you will this instant deliver to me the paper the cardinal signed;
or upon my soul, I will blow your brains out.”

With another man, Milady might have preserved some doubt; but she knew
Athos. Nevertheless, she remained motionless.

“You have one second to decide,” said he.

Milady saw by the contraction of his countenance that the trigger was
about to be pulled; she reached her hand quickly to her bosom, drew out
a paper, and held it toward Athos.

“Take it,” said she, “and be accursed!”

Athos took the paper, returned the pistol to his belt, approached the
lamp to be assured that it was the paper, unfolded it, and read:

“Dec. 3, 1627

“It is by my order and for the good of the state that the bearer of this
has done what he has done.

“RICHELIEU”

“And now,” said Athos, resuming his cloak and putting on his hat, “now
that I have drawn your teeth, viper, bite if you can.”

And he left the chamber without once looking behind him.

At the door he found the two men and the spare horse which they held.

“Gentlemen,” said he, “Monseigneur’s order is, you know, to conduct that
woman, without losing time, to Fort La Pointe, and never to leave her
till she is on board.”

As these words agreed wholly with the order they had received, they
bowed their heads in sign of assent.

With regard to Athos, he leaped lightly into the saddle and set out at
full gallop; only instead of following the road, he went across the
fields, urging his horse to the utmost and stopping occasionally to
listen.

In one of those halts he heard the steps of several horses on the road.
He had no doubt it was the cardinal and his escort. He immediately made
a new point in advance, rubbed his horse down with some heath and leaves
of trees, and placed himself across the road, about two hundred paces
from the camp.

“Who goes there?” cried he, as soon as he perceived the horsemen.

“That is our brave Musketeer, I think,” said the cardinal.

“Yes, monseigneur,” said Porthos, “it is he.”

“Monsieur Athos,” said Richelieu, “receive my thanks for the good guard
you have kept. Gentlemen, we are arrived; take the gate on the left. The
watchword is, ‘King and Re.’”

Saying these words, the cardinal saluted the three friends with an
inclination of his head, and took the right hand, followed by his
attendant--for that night he himself slept in the camp.

“Well!” said Porthos and Aramis together, as soon as the cardinal was
out of hearing, “well, he signed the paper she required!”

“I know it,” said Athos, coolly, “since here it is.”

And the three friends did not exchange another word till they reached
their quarters, except to give the watchword to the sentinels. Only they
sent Mousqueton to tell Planchet that his master was requested, the
instant that he left the trenches, to come to the quarters of the
Musketeers.

Milady, as Athos had foreseen, on finding the two men that awaited her,
made no difficulty in following them. She had had for an instant an
inclination to be reconducted to the cardinal, and relate everything to
him; but a revelation on her part would bring about a revelation on the
part of Athos. She might say that Athos had hanged her; but then Athos
would tell that she was branded. She thought it was best to preserve
silence, to discreetly set off to accomplish her difficult mission with
her usual skill; and then, all things being accomplished to the
satisfaction of the cardinal, to come to him and claim her vengeance.

In consequence, after having traveled all night, at seven o’clock she
was at the fort of the Point; at eight o’clock she had embarked; and at
nine, the vessel, which with letters of marque from the cardinal was
supposed to be sailing for Bayonne, raised anchor, and steered its
course toward England.




46 THE BASTION SAINT-GERVAIS


On arriving at the lodgings of his three friends, d’Artagnan found them
assembled in the same chamber. Athos was meditating; Porthos was
twisting his mustache; Aramis was saying his prayers in a charming
little Book of Hours, bound in blue velvet.

“Pardieu, gentlemen,” said he. “I hope what you have to tell me is worth
the trouble, or else, I warn you, I will not pardon you for making me
come here instead of getting a little rest after a night spent in taking
and dismantling a bastion. Ah, why were you not there, gentlemen? It was
warm work.”

“We were in a place where it was not very cold,” replied Porthos, giving
his mustache a twist which was peculiar to him.

“Hush!” said Athos.

“Oh, oh!” said d’Artagnan, comprehending the slight frown of the
Musketeer. “It appears there is something fresh aboard.”

“Aramis,” said Athos, “you went to breakfast the day before yesterday at
the inn of the Parpaillot, I believe?”

“Yes.”

“How did you fare?”

“For my part, I ate but little. The day before yesterday was a fish day,
and they had nothing but meat.”

“What,” said Athos, “no fish at a seaport?”

“They say,” said Aramis, resuming his pious reading, “that the dyke
which the cardinal is making drives them all out into the open sea.”

“But that is not quite what I mean to ask you, Aramis,” replied Athos.
“I want to know if you were left alone, and nobody interrupted you.”

“Why, I think there were not many intruders. Yes, Athos, I know what you
mean: we shall do very well at the Parpaillot.”

“Let us go to the Parpaillot, then, for here the walls are like sheets
of paper.”

D’Artagnan, who was accustomed to his friend’s manner of acting, and who
perceived immediately, by a word, a gesture, or a sign from him, that
the circumstances were serious, took Athos’s arm, and went out without
saying anything. Porthos followed, chatting with Aramis.

On their way they met Grimaud. Athos made him a sign to come with them.
Grimaud, according to custom, obeyed in silence; the poor lad had nearly
come to the pass of forgetting how to speak.

They arrived at the drinking room of the Parpaillot. It was seven
o’clock in the morning, and daylight began to appear. The three friends
ordered breakfast, and went into a room in which the host said they
would not be disturbed.

Unfortunately, the hour was badly chosen for a private conference. The
morning drum had just been beaten; everyone shook off the drowsiness of
night, and to dispel the humid morning air, came to take a drop at the
inn. Dragoons, Swiss, Guardsmen, Musketeers, light-horsemen, succeeded
one another with a rapidity which might answer the purpose of the host
very well, but agreed badly with the views of the four friends. Thus
they applied very curtly to the salutations, healths, and jokes of their
companions.

“I see how it will be,” said Athos: “we shall get into some pretty
quarrel or other, and we have no need of one just now. D’Artagnan, tell
us what sort of a night you have had, and we will describe ours
afterward.”

“Ah, yes,” said a light-horseman, with a glass of brandy in his hand,
which he sipped slowly. “I hear you gentlemen of the Guards have been in
the trenches tonight, and that you did not get much the best of the
Rochellais.”

D’Artagnan looked at Athos to know if he ought to reply to this intruder
who thus mixed unasked in their conversation.

“Well,” said Athos, “don’t you hear Monsieur de Busigny, who does you
the honor to ask you a question? Relate what has passed during the
night, since these gentlemen desire to know it.”

“Have you not taken a bastion?” said a Swiss, who was drinking rum out
of a beer glass.

“Yes, monsieur,” said d’Artagnan, bowing, “we have had that honor. We
even have, as you may have heard, introduced a barrel of powder under
one of the angles, which in blowing up made a very pretty breach.
Without reckoning that as the bastion was not built yesterday all the
rest of the building was badly shaken.”

“And what bastion is it?” asked a dragoon, with his saber run through a
goose which he was taking to be cooked.

“The bastion St. Gervais,” replied d’Artagnan, “from behind which the
Rochellais annoyed our workmen.”

“Was that affair hot?”

“Yes, moderately so. We lost five men, and the Rochellais eight or ten.”

“Balzempleu!” said the Swiss, who, notwithstanding the admirable
collection of oaths possessed by the German language, had acquired a
habit of swearing in French.

“But it is probable,” said the light-horseman, “that they will send
pioneers this morning to repair the bastion.”

“Yes, that’s probable,” said d’Artagnan.

“Gentlemen,” said Athos, “a wager!”

“Ah, wooi, a vager!” cried the Swiss.

“What is it?” said the light-horseman.

“Stop a bit,” said the dragoon, placing his saber like a spit upon the
two large iron dogs which held the firebrands in the chimney, “stop a
bit, I am in it. You cursed host! a dripping pan immediately, that I may
not lose a drop of the fat of this estimable bird.”

“You was right,” said the Swiss; “goose grease is kood with basdry.”

“There!” said the dragoon. “Now for the wager! We listen, Monsieur
Athos.”

“Yes, the wager!” said the light-horseman.

“Well, Monsieur de Busigny, I will bet you,” said Athos, “that my three
companions, Messieurs Porthos, Aramis, and d’Artagnan, and myself, will
go and breakfast in the bastion St. Gervais, and we will remain there an
hour, by the watch, whatever the enemy may do to dislodge us.”

Porthos and Aramis looked at each other; they began to comprehend.

“But,” said d’Artagnan, in the ear of Athos, “you are going to get us
all killed without mercy.”

“We are much more likely to be killed,” said Athos, “if we do not go.”

“My faith, gentlemen,” said Porthos, turning round upon his chair and
twisting his mustache, “that’s a fair bet, I hope.”

“I take it,” said M. de Busigny; “so let us fix the stake.”

“You are four gentlemen,” said Athos, “and we are four; an unlimited
dinner for eight. Will that do?”

“Capitally,” replied M. de Busigny.

“Perfectly,” said the dragoon.

“That shoots me,” said the Swiss.

The fourth auditor, who during all this conversation had played a mute
part, made a sign of the head in proof that he acquiesced in the
proposition.

“The breakfast for these gentlemen is ready,” said the host.

“Well, bring it,” said Athos.

The host obeyed. Athos called Grimaud, pointed to a large basket which
lay in a corner, and made a sign to him to wrap the viands up in the
napkins.

Grimaud understood that it was to be a breakfast on the grass, took the
basket, packed up the viands, added the bottles, and then took the
basket on his arm.

“But where are you going to eat my breakfast?” asked the host.

“What matter, if you are paid for it?” said Athos, and he threw two
pistoles majestically on the table.

“Shall I give you the change, my officer?” said the host.

“No, only add two bottles of champagne, and the difference will be for
the napkins.”

The host had not quite so good a bargain as he at first hoped for, but
he made amends by slipping in two bottles of Anjou wine instead of two
bottles of champagne.

“Monsieur de Busigny,” said Athos, “will you be so kind as to set your
watch with mine, or permit me to regulate mine by yours?”

“Which you please, monsieur!” said the light-horseman, drawing from his
fob a very handsome watch, studded with diamonds; “half past seven.”

“Thirty-five minutes after seven,” said Athos, “by which you perceive I
am five minutes faster than you.”

And bowing to all the astonished persons present, the young men took the
road to the bastion St. Gervais, followed by Grimaud, who carried the
basket, ignorant of where he was going but in the passive obedience
which Athos had taught him not even thinking of asking.

As long as they were within the circle of the camp, the four friends did
not exchange one word; besides, they were followed by the curious, who,
hearing of the wager, were anxious to know how they would come out of
it. But when once they passed the line of circumvallation and found
themselves in the open plain, d’Artagnan, who was completely ignorant of
what was going forward, thought it was time to demand an explanation.

“And now, my dear Athos,” said he, “do me the kindness to tell me where
we are going?”

“Why, you see plainly enough we are going to the bastion.”

“But what are we going to do there?”

“You know well that we go to breakfast there.”

“But why did we not breakfast at the Parpaillot?”

“Because we have very important matters to communicate to one another,
and it was impossible to talk five minutes in that inn without being
annoyed by all those importunate fellows, who keep coming in, saluting
you, and addressing you. Here at least,” said Athos, pointing to the
bastion, “they will not come and disturb us.”

“It appears to me,” said d’Artagnan, with that prudence which allied
itself in him so naturally with excessive bravery, “that we could have
found some retired place on the downs or the seashore.”

“Where we should have been seen all four conferring together, so that at
the end of a quarter of an hour the cardinal would have been informed by
his spies that we were holding a council.”

“Yes,” said Aramis, “Athos is right: ANIMADVERTUNTUR IN DESERTIS.”

“A desert would not have been amiss,” said Porthos; “but it behooved us
to find it.”

“There is no desert where a bird cannot pass over one’s head, where a
fish cannot leap out of the water, where a rabbit cannot come out of its
burrow, and I believe that bird, fish, and rabbit each becomes a spy of
the cardinal. Better, then, pursue our enterprise; from which, besides,
we cannot retreat without shame. We have made a wager--a wager which
could not have been foreseen, and of which I defy anyone to divine the
true cause. We are going, in order to win it, to remain an hour in the
bastion. Either we shall be attacked, or not. If we are not, we shall
have all the time to talk, and nobody will hear us--for I guarantee the
walls of the bastion have no ears; if we are, we will talk of our
affairs just the same. Moreover, in defending ourselves, we shall cover
ourselves with glory. You see that everything is to our advantage.”

“Yes,” said d’Artagnan; “but we shall indubitably attract a ball.”

“Well, my dear,” replied Athos, “you know well that the balls most to be
dreaded are not from the enemy.”

“But for such an expedition we surely ought to have brought our
muskets.”

“You are stupid, friend Porthos. Why should we load ourselves with a
useless burden?”

“I don’t find a good musket, twelve cartridges, and a powder flask very
useless in the face of an enemy.”

“Well,” replied Athos, “have you not heard what d’Artagnan said?”

“What did he say?” demanded Porthos.

“d’Artagnan said that in the attack of last night eight or ten Frenchmen
were killed, and as many Rochellais.”

“What then?”

“The bodies were not plundered, were they? It appears the conquerors had
something else to do.”

“Well?”

“Well, we shall find their muskets, their cartridges, and their flasks;
and instead of four musketoons and twelve balls, we shall have fifteen
guns and a hundred charges to fire.”

“Oh, Athos!” said Aramis, “truly you are a great man.”

Porthos nodded in sign of agreement. D’Artagnan alone did not seem
convinced.

Grimaud no doubt shared the misgivings of the young man, for seeing that
they continued to advance toward the bastion--something he had till then
doubted--he pulled his master by the skirt of his coat.

“Where are we going?” asked he, by a gesture.

Athos pointed to the bastion.

“But,” said Grimaud, in the same silent dialect, “we shall leave our
skins there.”

Athos raised his eyes and his finger toward heaven.

Grimaud put his basket on the ground and sat down with a shake of the
head.

Athos took a pistol from his belt, looked to see if it was properly
primed, cocked it, and placed the muzzle close to Grimaud’s ear.

Grimaud was on his legs again as if by a spring. Athos then made him a
sign to take up his basket and to walk on first. Grimaud obeyed. All
that Grimaud gained by this momentary pantomime was to pass from the
rear guard to the vanguard.

Arrived at the bastion, the four friends turned round.

More than three hundred soldiers of all kinds were assembled at the gate
of the camp; and in a separate group might be distinguished M. de
Busigny, the dragoon, the Swiss, and the fourth bettor.

Athos took off his hat, placed it on the end of his sword, and waved it
in the air.

All the spectators returned him his salute, accompanying this courtesy
with a loud hurrah which was audible to the four; after which all four
disappeared in the bastion, whither Grimaud had preceded them.




47 THE COUNCIL OF THE MUSKETEERS


As Athos had foreseen, the bastion was only occupied by a dozen corpses,
French and Rochellais.

“Gentlemen,” said Athos, who had assumed the command of the expedition,
“while Grimaud spreads the table, let us begin by collecting the guns
and cartridges together. We can talk while performing that necessary
task. These gentlemen,” added he, pointing to the bodies, “cannot hear
us.”

“But we could throw them into the ditch,” said Porthos, “after having
assured ourselves they have nothing in their pockets.”

“Yes,” said Athos, “that’s Grimaud’s business.”

“Well, then,” cried d’Artagnan, “pray let Grimaud search them and throw
them over the walls.”

“Heaven forfend!” said Athos; “they may serve us.”

“These bodies serve us?” said Porthos. “You are mad, dear friend.”

“Judge not rashly, say the gospel and the cardinal,” replied Athos. “How
many guns, gentlemen?”

“Twelve,” replied Aramis.

“How many shots?”

“A hundred.”

“That’s quite as many as we shall want. Let us load the guns.”

The four Musketeers went to work; and as they were loading the last
musket Grimaud announced that the breakfast was ready.

Athos replied, always by gestures, that that was well, and indicated to
Grimaud, by pointing to a turret that resembled a pepper caster, that he
was to stand as sentinel. Only, to alleviate the tediousness of the
duty, Athos allowed him to take a loaf, two cutlets, and a bottle of
wine.

“And now to table,” said Athos.

The four friends seated themselves on the ground with their legs crossed
like Turks, or even tailors.

“And now,” said d’Artagnan, “as there is no longer any fear of being
overheard, I hope you are going to let me into your secret.”

“I hope at the same time to procure you amusement and glory, gentlemen,”
said Athos. “I have induced you to take a charming promenade; here is a
delicious breakfast; and yonder are five hundred persons, as you may see
through the loopholes, taking us for heroes or madmen--two classes of
imbeciles greatly resembling each other.”

“But the secret!” said d’Artagnan.

“The secret is,” said Athos, “that I saw Milady last night.”

D’Artagnan was lifting a glass to his lips; but at the name of Milady,
his hand trembled so, that he was obliged to put the glass on the ground
again for fear of spilling the contents.”

“You saw your wi--”

“Hush!” interrupted Athos. “You forget, my dear, you forget that these
gentlemen are not initiated into my family affairs like yourself. I have
seen Milady.”

“Where?” demanded d’Artagnan.

“Within two leagues of this place, at the inn of the Red Dovecot.”

“In that case I am lost,” said d’Artagnan.

“Not so bad yet,” replied Athos; “for by this time she must have quit
the shores of France.”

D’Artagnan breathed again.

“But after all,” asked Porthos, “who is Milady?”

“A charming woman!” said Athos, sipping a glass of sparkling wine.
“Villainous host!” cried he, “he has given us Anjou wine instead of
champagne, and fancies we know no better! Yes,” continued he, “a
charming woman, who entertained kind views toward our friend d’Artagnan,
who, on his part, has given her some offense for which she tried to
revenge herself a month ago by having him killed by two musket shots, a
week ago by trying to poison him, and yesterday by demanding his head of
the cardinal.”

“What! by demanding my head of the cardinal?” cried d’Artagnan, pale
with terror.

“Yes, that is true as the Gospel,” said Porthos; “I heard her with my
own ears.”

“I also,” said Aramis.

“Then,” said d’Artagnan, letting his arm fall with discouragement, “it
is useless to struggle longer. I may as well blow my brains out, and all
will be over.”

“That’s the last folly to be committed,” said Athos, “seeing it is the
only one for which there is no remedy.”

“But I can never escape,” said d’Artagnan, “with such enemies. First, my
stranger of Meung; then de Wardes, to whom I have given three sword
wounds; next Milady, whose secret I have discovered; finally, the
cardinal, whose vengeance I have balked.”

“Well,” said Athos, “that only makes four; and we are four--one for one.
Pardieu! if we may believe the signs Grimaud is making, we are about to
have to do with a very different number of people. What is it, Grimaud?
Considering the gravity of the occasion, I permit you to speak, my
friend; but be laconic, I beg. What do you see?”

“A troop.”

“Of how many persons?”

“Twenty men.”

“What sort of men?”

“Sixteen pioneers, four soldiers.”

“How far distant?”

“Five hundred paces.”

“Good! We have just time to finish this fowl and to drink one glass of
wine to your health, d’Artagnan.”

“To your health!” repeated Porthos and Aramis.

“Well, then, to my health! although I am very much afraid that your good
wishes will not be of great service to me.”

“Bah!” said Athos, “God is great, as say the followers of Mohammed, and
the future is in his hands.”

Then, swallowing the contents of his glass, which he put down close to
him, Athos arose carelessly, took the musket next to him, and drew near
to one of the loopholes.

Porthos, Aramis and d’Artagnan followed his example. As to Grimaud, he
received orders to place himself behind the four friends in order to
reload their weapons.

“Pardieu!” said Athos, “it was hardly worth while to distribute
ourselves for twenty fellows armed with pickaxes, mattocks, and shovels.
Grimaud had only to make them a sign to go away, and I am convinced they
would have left us in peace.”

“I doubt that,” replied d’Artagnan, “for they are advancing very
resolutely. Besides, in addition to the pioneers, there are four
soldiers and a brigadier, armed with muskets.”

“That’s because they don’t see us,” said Athos.

“My faith,” said Aramis, “I must confess I feel a great repugnance to
fire on these poor devils of civilians.”

“He is a bad priest,” said Porthos, “who has pity for heretics.”

“In truth,” said Athos, “Aramis is right. I will warn them.”

“What the devil are you going to do?” cried d’Artagnan, “you will be
shot.”

But Athos heeded not his advice. Mounting on the breach, with his musket
in one hand and his hat in the other, he said, bowing courteously and
addressing the soldiers and the pioneers, who, astonished at this
apparition, stopped fifty paces from the bastion: “Gentlemen, a few
friends and myself are about to breakfast in this bastion. Now, you know
nothing is more disagreeable than being disturbed when one is at
breakfast. We request you, then, if you really have business here, to
wait till we have finished our repast, or to come again a short time
hence; unless, which would be far better, you form the salutary
resolution to quit the side of the rebels, and come and drink with us to
the health of the King of France.”

“Take care, Athos!” cried d’Artagnan; “don’t you see they are aiming?”

“Yes, yes,” said Athos; “but they are only civilians--very bad marksmen,
who will be sure not to hit me.”

In fact, at the same instant four shots were fired, and the balls were
flattened against the wall around Athos, but not one touched him.

Four shots replied to them almost instantaneously, but much better aimed
than those of the aggressors; three soldiers fell dead, and one of the
pioneers was wounded.

“Grimaud,” said Athos, still on the breach, “another musket!”

Grimaud immediately obeyed. On their part, the three friends had
reloaded their arms; a second discharge followed the first. The
brigadier and two pioneers fell dead; the rest of the troop took to
flight.

“Now, gentlemen, a sortie!” cried Athos.

And the four friends rushed out of the fort, gained the field of battle,
picked up the four muskets of the privates and the half-pike of the
brigadier, and convinced that the fugitives would not stop till they
reached the city, turned again toward the bastion, bearing with them the
trophies of their victory.

“Reload the muskets, Grimaud,” said Athos, “and we, gentlemen, will go
on with our breakfast, and resume our conversation. Where were we?”

“I recollect you were saying,” said d’Artagnan, “that after having
demanded my head of the cardinal, Milady had quit the shores of France.
Whither goes she?” added he, strongly interested in the route Milady
followed.

“She goes into England,” said Athos.

“With what view?”

“With the view of assassinating, or causing to be assassinated, the Duke
of Buckingham.”

D’Artagnan uttered an exclamation of surprise and indignation.

“But this is infamous!” cried he.

“As to that,” said Athos, “I beg you to believe that I care very little
about it. Now you have done, Grimaud, take our brigadier’s half-pike,
tie a napkin to it, and plant it on top of our bastion, that these
rebels of Rochellais may see that they have to deal with brave and loyal
soldiers of the king.”

Grimaud obeyed without replying. An instant afterward, the white flag
was floating over the heads of the four friends. A thunder of applause
saluted its appearance; half the camp was at the barrier.

“How?” replied d’Artagnan, “you care little if she kills Buckingham or
causes him to be killed? But the duke is our friend.”

“The duke is English; the duke fights against us. Let her do what she
likes with the duke; I care no more about him than an empty bottle.” And
Athos threw fifteen paces from him an empty bottle from which he had
poured the last drop into his glass.

“A moment,” said d’Artagnan. “I will not abandon Buckingham thus. He
gave us some very fine horses.”

“And moreover, very handsome saddles,” said Porthos, who at the moment
wore on his cloak the lace of his own.

“Besides,” said Aramis, “God desires the conversion and not the death of
a sinner.”

“Amen!” said Athos, “and we will return to that subject later, if such
be your pleasure; but what for the moment engaged my attention most
earnestly, and I am sure you will understand me, d’Artagnan, was the
getting from this woman a kind of carte blanche which she had extorted
from the cardinal, and by means of which she could with impunity get rid
of you and perhaps of us.”

“But this creature must be a demon!” said Porthos, holding out his plate
to Aramis, who was cutting up a fowl.

“And this carte blanche,” said d’Artagnan, “this carte blanche, does it
remain in her hands?”

“No, it passed into mine; I will not say without trouble, for if I did I
should tell a lie.”

“My dear Athos, I shall no longer count the number of times I am
indebted to you for my life.”

“Then it was to go to her that you left us?” said Aramis.

“Exactly.”

“And you have that letter of the cardinal?” said d’Artagnan.

“Here it is,” said Athos; and he took the invaluable paper from the
pocket of his uniform. D’Artagnan unfolded it with one hand, whose
trembling he did not even attempt to conceal, to read:

“Dec. 3, 1627

“It is by my order and for the good of the state that the bearer of this
has done what he has done.

“RICHELIEU”

“In fact,” said Aramis, “it is an absolution according to rule.”

“That paper must be torn to pieces,” said d’Artagnan, who fancied he
read in it his sentence of death.

“On the contrary,” said Athos, “it must be preserved carefully. I would
not give up this paper if covered with as many gold pieces.”

“And what will she do now?” asked the young man.

“Why,” replied Athos, carelessly, “she is probably going to write to the
cardinal that a damned Musketeer, named Athos, has taken her
safe-conduct from her by force; she will advise him in the same letter
to get rid of his two friends, Aramis and Porthos, at the same time. The
cardinal will remember that these are the same men who have often
crossed his path; and then some fine morning he will arrest d’Artagnan,
and for fear he should feel lonely, he will send us to keep him company
in the Bastille.”

“Go to! It appears to me you make dull jokes, my dear,” said Porthos.

“I do not jest,” said Athos.

“Do you know,” said Porthos, “that to twist that damned Milady’s neck
would be a smaller sin than to twist those of these poor devils of
Huguenots, who have committed no other crime than singing in French the
psalms we sing in Latin?”

“What says the abbe?” asked Athos, quietly.

“I say I am entirely of Porthos’s opinion,” replied Aramis.

“And I, too,” said d’Artagnan.

“Fortunately, she is far off,” said Porthos, “for I confess she would
worry me if she were here.”

“She worries me in England as well as in France,” said Athos.

“She worries me everywhere,” said d’Artagnan.

“But when you held her in your power, why did you not drown her,
strangle her, hang her?” said Porthos. “It is only the dead who do not
return.”

“You think so, Porthos?” replied the Musketeer, with a sad smile which
d’Artagnan alone understood.

“I have an idea,” said d’Artagnan.

“What is it?” said the Musketeers.

“To arms!” cried Grimaud.

The young men sprang up, and seized their muskets.

This time a small troop advanced, consisting of from twenty to
twenty-five men; but they were not pioneers, they were soldiers of the
garrison.

“Shall we return to the camp?” said Porthos. “I don’t think the sides
are equal.”

“Impossible, for three reasons,” replied Athos. “The first, that we have
not finished breakfast; the second, that we still have some very
important things to say; and the third, that it yet wants ten minutes
before the lapse of the hour.”

“Well, then,” said Aramis, “we must form a plan of battle.”

“That’s very simple,” replied Athos. “As soon as the enemy are within
musket shot, we must fire upon them. If they continue to advance, we
must fire again. We must fire as long as we have loaded guns. If those
who remain of the troop persist in coming to the assault, we will allow
the besiegers to get as far as the ditch, and then we will push down
upon their heads that strip of wall which keeps its perpendicular by a
miracle.”

“Bravo!” cried Porthos. “Decidedly, Athos, you were born to be a
general, and the cardinal, who fancies himself a great soldier, is
nothing beside you.”

“Gentlemen,” said Athos, “no divided attention, I beg; let each one pick
out his man.”

“I cover mine,” said d’Artagnan.

“And I mine,” said Porthos.

“And I mine,” said Aramis.

“Fire, then,” said Athos.

The four muskets made but one report, but four men fell.

The drum immediately beat, and the little troop advanced at charging
pace.

Then the shots were repeated without regularity, but always aimed with
the same accuracy. Nevertheless, as if they had been aware of the
numerical weakness of the friends, the Rochellais continued to advance
in quick time.

With every three shots at least two men fell; but the march of those who
remained was not slackened.

Arrived at the foot of the bastion, there were still more than a dozen
of the enemy. A last discharge welcomed them, but did not stop them;
they jumped into the ditch, and prepared to scale the breach.

“Now, my friends,” said Athos, “finish them at a blow. To the wall; to
the wall!”

And the four friends, seconded by Grimaud, pushed with the barrels of
their muskets an enormous sheet of the wall, which bent as if pushed by
the wind, and detaching itself from its base, fell with a horrible crash
into the ditch. Then a fearful crash was heard; a cloud of dust mounted
toward the sky--and all was over!

“Can we have destroyed them all, from the first to the last?” said
Athos.

“My faith, it appears so!” said d’Artagnan.

“No,” cried Porthos; “there go three or four, limping away.”

In fact, three or four of these unfortunate men, covered with dirt and
blood, fled along the hollow way, and at length regained the city. These
were all who were left of the little troop.

Athos looked at his watch.

“Gentlemen,” said he, “we have been here an hour, and our wager is won;
but we will be fair players. Besides, d’Artagnan has not told us his
idea yet.”

And the Musketeer, with his usual coolness, reseated himself before the
remains of the breakfast.

“My idea?” said d’Artagnan.

“Yes; you said you had an idea,” said Athos.

“Oh, I remember,” said d’Artagnan. “Well, I will go to England a second
time; I will go and find Buckingham.”

“You shall not do that, d’Artagnan,” said Athos, coolly.

“And why not? Have I not been there once?”

“Yes; but at that period we were not at war. At that period Buckingham
was an ally, and not an enemy. What you would now do amounts to
treason.”

D’Artagnan perceived the force of this reasoning, and was silent.

“But,” said Porthos, “I think I have an idea, in my turn.”

“Silence for Monsieur Porthos’s idea!” said Aramis.

“I will ask leave of absence of Monsieur de Treville, on some pretext or
other which you must invent; I am not very clever at pretexts. Milady
does not know me; I will get access to her without her suspecting me,
and when I catch my beauty, I will strangle her.”

“Well,” replied Athos, “I am not far from approving the idea of Monsieur
Porthos.”

“For shame!” said Aramis. “Kill a woman? No, listen to me; I have the
true idea.”

“Let us see your idea, Aramis,” said Athos, who felt much deference for
the young Musketeer.

“We must inform the queen.”

“Ah, my faith, yes!” said Porthos and d’Artagnan, at the same time; “we
are coming nearer to it now.”

“Inform the queen!” said Athos; “and how? Have we relations with the
court? Could we send anyone to Paris without its being known in the
camp? From here to Paris it is a hundred and forty leagues; before our
letter was at Angers we should be in a dungeon.”

“As to remitting a letter with safety to her Majesty,” said Aramis,
coloring, “I will take that upon myself. I know a clever person at
Tours--”

Aramis stopped on seeing Athos smile.

“Well, do you not adopt this means, Athos?” said d’Artagnan.

“I do not reject it altogether,” said Athos; “but I wish to remind
Aramis that he cannot quit the camp, and that nobody but one of
ourselves is trustworthy; that two hours after the messenger has set
out, all the Capuchins, all the police, all the black caps of the
cardinal, will know your letter by heart, and you and your clever person
will be arrested.”

“Without reckoning,” objected Porthos, “that the queen would save
Monsieur de Buckingham, but would take no heed of us.”

“Gentlemen,” said d’Artagnan, “what Porthos says is full of sense.”

“Ah, ah! but what’s going on in the city yonder?” said Athos.

“They are beating the general alarm.”

The four friends listened, and the sound of the drum plainly reached
them.

“You see, they are going to send a whole regiment against us,” said
Athos.

“You don’t think of holding out against a whole regiment, do you?” said
Porthos.

“Why not?” said the Musketeer. “I feel myself quite in a humor for it;
and I would hold out before an army if we had taken the precaution to
bring a dozen more bottles of wine.”

“Upon my word, the drum draws near,” said d’Artagnan.

“Let it come,” said Athos. “It is a quarter of an hour’s journey from
here to the city, consequently a quarter of an hour’s journey from the
city to hither. That is more than time enough for us to devise a plan.
If we go from this place we shall never find another so suitable. Ah,
stop! I have it, gentlemen; the right idea has just occurred to me.”

“Tell us.”

“Allow me to give Grimaud some indispensable orders.”

Athos made a sign for his lackey to approach.

“Grimaud,” said Athos, pointing to the bodies which lay under the wall
of the bastion, “take those gentlemen, set them up against the wall, put
their hats upon their heads, and their guns in their hands.”

“Oh, the great man!” cried d’Artagnan. “I comprehend now.”

“You comprehend?” said Porthos.

“And do you comprehend, Grimaud?” said Aramis.

Grimaud made a sign in the affirmative.

“That’s all that is necessary,” said Athos; “now for my idea.”

“I should like, however, to comprehend,” said Porthos.

“That is useless.”

“Yes, yes! Athos’s idea!” cried Aramis and d’Artagnan, at the same time.

“This Milady, this woman, this creature, this demon, has a
brother-in-law, as I think you told me, d’Artagnan?”

“Yes, I know him very well; and I also believe that he has not a very
warm affection for his sister-in-law.”

“There is no harm in that. If he detested her, it would be all the
better,” replied Athos.

“In that case we are as well off as we wish.”

“And yet,” said Porthos, “I would like to know what Grimaud is about.”

“Silence, Porthos!” said Aramis.

“What is her brother-in-law’s name?”

“Lord de Winter.”

“Where is he now?”

“He returned to London at the first sound of war.”

“Well, there’s just the man we want,” said Athos. “It is he whom we must
warn. We will have him informed that his sister-in-law is on the point
of having someone assassinated, and beg him not to lose sight of her.
There is in London, I hope, some establishment like that of the
Magdalens, or of the Repentant Daughters. He must place his sister in
one of these, and we shall be in peace.”

“Yes,” said d’Artagnan, “till she comes out.”

“Ah, my faith!” said Athos, “you require too much, d’Artagnan. I have
given you all I have, and I beg leave to tell you that this is the
bottom of my sack.”

“But I think it would be still better,” said Aramis, “to inform the
queen and Lord de Winter at the same time.”

“Yes; but who is to carry the letter to Tours, and who to London?”

“I answer for Bazin,” said Aramis.

“And I for Planchet,” said d’Artagnan.

“Ay,” said Porthos, “if we cannot leave the camp, our lackeys may.”

“To be sure they may; and this very day we will write the letters,” said
Aramis. “Give the lackeys money, and they will start.”

“We will give them money?” replied Athos. “Have you any money?”

The four friends looked at one another, and a cloud came over the brows
which but lately had been so cheerful.

“Look out!” cried d’Artagnan, “I see black points and red points moving
yonder. Why did you talk of a regiment, Athos? It is a veritable army!”

“My faith, yes,” said Athos; “there they are. See the sneaks come,
without drum or trumpet. Ah, ah! have you finished, Grimaud?”

Grimaud made a sign in the affirmative, and pointed to a dozen bodies
which he had set up in the most picturesque attitudes. Some carried
arms, others seemed to be taking aim, and the remainder appeared merely
to be sword in hand.

“Bravo!” said Athos; “that does honor to your imagination.”

“All very well,” said Porthos, “but I should like to understand.”

“Let us decamp first, and you will understand afterward.”

“A moment, gentlemen, a moment; give Grimaud time to clear away the
breakfast.”

“Ah, ah!” said Aramis, “the black points and the red points are visibly
enlarging. I am of d’Artagnan’s opinion; we have no time to lose in
regaining our camp.”

“My faith,” said Athos, “I have nothing to say against a retreat. We bet
upon one hour, and we have stayed an hour and a half. Nothing can be
said; let us be off, gentlemen, let us be off!”

Grimaud was already ahead, with the basket and the dessert. The four
friends followed, ten paces behind him.

“What the devil shall we do now, gentlemen?” cried Athos.

“Have you forgotten anything?” said Aramis.

“The white flag, morbleu! We must not leave a flag in the hands of the
enemy, even if that flag be but a napkin.”

And Athos ran back to the bastion, mounted the platform, and bore off
the flag; but as the Rochellais had arrived within musket range, they
opened a terrible fire upon this man, who appeared to expose himself for
pleasure’s sake.

But Athos might be said to bear a charmed life. The balls passed and
whistled all around him; not one struck him.

Athos waved his flag, turning his back on the guards of the city, and
saluting those of the camp. On both sides loud cries arose--on the one
side cries of anger, on the other cries of enthusiasm.

A second discharge followed the first, and three balls, by passing
through it, made the napkin really a flag. Cries were heard from the
camp, “Come down! come down!”

Athos came down; his friends, who anxiously awaited him, saw him
returned with joy.

“Come along, Athos, come along!” cried d’Artagnan; “now we have found
everything except money, it would be stupid to be killed.”

But Athos continued to march majestically, whatever remarks his
companions made; and they, finding their remarks useless, regulated
their pace by his.

Grimaud and his basket were far in advance, out of the range of the
balls.

At the end of an instant they heard a furious fusillade.

“What’s that?” asked Porthos, “what are they firing at now? I hear no
balls whistle, and I see nobody!”

“They are firing at the corpses,” replied Athos.

“But the dead cannot return their fire.”

“Certainly not! They will then fancy it is an ambuscade, they will
deliberate; and by the time they have found out the pleasantry, we shall
be out of the range of their balls. That renders it useless to get a
pleurisy by too much haste.”

“Oh, I comprehend now,” said the astonished Porthos.

“That’s lucky,” said Athos, shrugging his shoulders.

On their part, the French, on seeing the four friends return at such a
step, uttered cries of enthusiasm.

At length a fresh discharge was heard, and this time the balls came
rattling among the stones around the four friends, and whistling sharply
in their ears. The Rochellais had at last taken possession of the
bastion.

“These Rochellais are bungling fellows,” said Athos; “how many have we
killed of them--a dozen?”

“Or fifteen.”

“How many did we crush under the wall?”

“Eight or ten.”

“And in exchange for all that not even a scratch! Ah, but what is the
matter with your hand, d’Artagnan? It bleeds, seemingly.”

“Oh, it’s nothing,” said d’Artagnan.

“A spent ball?”

“Not even that.”

“What is it, then?”

We have said that Athos loved d’Artagnan like a child, and this somber
and inflexible personage felt the anxiety of a parent for the young man.

“Only grazed a little,” replied d’Artagnan; “my fingers were caught
between two stones--that of the wall and that of my ring--and the skin
was broken.”

“That comes of wearing diamonds, my master,” said Athos, disdainfully.

“Ah, to be sure,” cried Porthos, “there is a diamond. Why the devil,
then, do we plague ourselves about money, when there is a diamond?”

“Stop a bit!” said Aramis.

“Well thought of, Porthos; this time you have an idea.”

“Undoubtedly,” said Porthos, drawing himself up at Athos’s compliment;
“as there is a diamond, let us sell it.”

“But,” said d’Artagnan, “it is the queen’s diamond.”

“The stronger reason why it should be sold,” replied Athos. “The queen
saving Monsieur de Buckingham, her lover; nothing more just. The queen
saving us, her friends; nothing more moral. Let us sell the diamond.
What says Monsieur the Abbe? I don’t ask Porthos; his opinion has been
given.”

“Why, I think,” said Aramis, blushing as usual, “that his ring not
coming from a mistress, and consequently not being a love token,
d’Artagnan may sell it.”

“My dear Aramis, you speak like theology personified. Your advice, then,
is--”

“To sell the diamond,” replied Aramis.

“Well, then,” said d’Artagnan, gaily, “let us sell the diamond, and say
no more about it.”

The fusillade continued; but the four friends were out of reach, and the
Rochellais only fired to appease their consciences.

“My faith, it was time that idea came into Porthos’s head. Here we are
at the camp; therefore, gentlemen, not a word more of this affair. We
are observed; they are coming to meet us. We shall be carried in
triumph.”

In fact, as we have said, the whole camp was in motion. More than two
thousand persons had assisted, as at a spectacle, in this fortunate but
wild undertaking of the four friends--an undertaking of which they were
far from suspecting the real motive. Nothing was heard but cries of
“Live the Musketeers! Live the Guards!” M. de Busigny was the first to
come and shake Athos by the hand, and acknowledge that the wager was
lost. The dragoon and the Swiss followed him, and all their comrades
followed the dragoon and the Swiss. There was nothing but felicitations,
pressures of the hand, and embraces; there was no end to the
inextinguishable laughter at the Rochellais. The tumult at length became
so great that the cardinal fancied there must be some riot, and sent La
Houdiniere, his captain of the Guards, to inquire what was going on.

The affair was described to the messenger with all the effervescence of
enthusiasm.

“Well?” asked the cardinal, on seeing La Houdiniere return.

“Well, monseigneur,” replied the latter, “three Musketeers and a
Guardsman laid a wager with Monsieur de Busigny that they would go and
breakfast in the bastion St. Gervais; and while breakfasting they held
it for two hours against the enemy, and have killed I don’t know how
many Rochellais.”

“Did you inquire the names of those three Musketeers?”

“Yes, monseigneur.”

“What are their names?”

“Messieurs Athos, Porthos, and Aramis.”

“Still my three brave fellows!” murmured the cardinal. “And the
Guardsman?”

“d’Artagnan.”

“Still my young scapegrace. Positively, these four men must be on my
side.”

The same evening the cardinal spoke to M. de Treville of the exploit of
the morning, which was the talk of the whole camp. M. de Treville, who
had received the account of the adventure from the mouths of the heroes
of it, related it in all its details to his Eminence, not forgetting the
episode of the napkin.

“That’s well, Monsieur de Treville,” said the cardinal; “pray let that
napkin be sent to me. I will have three fleur-de-lis embroidered on it
in gold, and will give it to your company as a standard.”

“Monseigneur,” said M. de Treville, “that will be unjust to the
Guardsmen. Monsieur d’Artagnan is not with me; he serves under Monsieur
Dessessart.”

“Well, then, take him,” said the cardinal; “when four men are so much
attached to one another, it is only fair that they should serve in the
same company.”

That same evening M. de Treville announced this good news to the three
Musketeers and d’Artagnan, inviting all four to breakfast with him next
morning.

D’Artagnan was beside himself with joy. We know that the dream of his
life had been to become a Musketeer. The three friends were likewise
greatly delighted.

“My faith,” said d’Artagnan to Athos, “you had a triumphant idea! As you
said, we have acquired glory, and were enabled to carry on a
conversation of the highest importance.”

“Which we can resume now without anybody suspecting us, for, with the
help of God, we shall henceforth pass for cardinalists.”

That evening d’Artagnan went to present his respects to M. Dessessart,
and inform him of his promotion.

M Dessessart, who esteemed d’Artagnan, made him offers of help, as this
change would entail expenses for equipment.

D’Artagnan refused; but thinking the opportunity a good one, he begged
him to have the diamond he put into his hand valued, as he wished to
turn it into money.

The next day, M. Dessessart’s valet came to d’Artagnan’s lodging, and
gave him a bag containing seven thousand livres.

This was the price of the queen’s diamond.




48 A FAMILY AFFAIR


Athos had invented the phrase, family affair. A family affair was not
subject to the investigation of the cardinal; a family affair concerned
nobody. People might employ themselves in a family affair before all the
world. Therefore Athos had invented the phrase, family affair.

Aramis had discovered the idea, the lackeys.

Porthos had discovered the means, the diamond.

D’Artagnan alone had discovered nothing--he, ordinarily the most
inventive of the four; but it must be also said that the very name of
Milady paralyzed him.

Ah! no, we were mistaken; he had discovered a purchaser for his diamond.

The breakfast at M. de Treville’s was as gay and cheerful as possible.
D’Artagnan already wore his uniform--for being nearly of the same size
as Aramis, and as Aramis was so liberally paid by the publisher who
purchased his poem as to allow him to buy everything double, he sold his
friend a complete outfit.

D’Artagnan would have been at the height of his wishes if he had not
constantly seen Milady like a dark cloud hovering in the horizon.

After breakfast, it was agreed that they should meet again in the
evening at Athos’s lodging, and there finish their plans.

D’Artagnan passed the day in exhibiting his Musketeer’s uniform in every
street of the camp.

In the evening, at the appointed hour, the four friends met. There only
remained three things to decide--what they should write to Milady’s
brother; what they should write to the clever person at Tours; and which
should be the lackeys to carry the letters.

Everyone offered his own. Athos talked of the discretion of Grimaud, who
never spoke a word but when his master unlocked his mouth. Porthos
boasted of the strength of Mousqueton, who was big enough to thrash four
men of ordinary size. Aramis, confiding in the address of Bazin, made a
pompous eulogium on his candidate. Finally, d’Artagnan had entire faith
in the bravery of Planchet, and reminded them of the manner in which he
had conducted himself in the ticklish affair of Boulogne.

These four virtues disputed the prize for a length of time, and gave
birth to magnificent speeches which we do not repeat here for fear they
should be deemed too long.

“Unfortunately,” said Athos, “he whom we send must possess in himself
alone the four qualities united.”

“But where is such a lackey to be found?”

“Not to be found!” cried Athos. “I know it well, so take Grimaud.”

“Take Mousqueton.”

“Take Bazin.”

“Take Planchet. Planchet is brave and shrewd; they are two qualities out
of the four.”

“Gentlemen,” said Aramis, “the principal question is not to know which
of our four lackeys is the most discreet, the most strong, the most
clever, or the most brave; the principal thing is to know which loves
money the best.”

“What Aramis says is very sensible,” replied Athos; “we must speculate
upon the faults of people, and not upon their virtues. Monsieur Abbe,
you are a great moralist.”

“Doubtless,” said Aramis, “for we not only require to be well served in
order to succeed, but moreover, not to fail; for in case of failure,
heads are in question, not for our lackeys--”

“Speak lower, Aramis,” said Athos.

“That’s wise--not for the lackeys,” resumed Aramis, “but for the
master--for the masters, we may say. Are our lackeys sufficiently
devoted to us to risk their lives for us? No.”

“My faith,” said d’Artagnan. “I would almost answer for Planchet.”

“Well, my dear friend, add to his natural devotedness a good sum of
money, and then, instead of answering for him once, answer for him
twice.”

“Why, good God! you will be deceived just the same,” said Athos, who was
an optimist when things were concerned, and a pessimist when men were in
question. “They will promise everything for the sake of the money, and
on the road fear will prevent them from acting. Once taken, they will be
pressed; when pressed, they will confess everything. What the devil! we
are not children. To reach England”--Athos lowered his voice--“all
France, covered with spies and creatures of the cardinal, must be
crossed. A passport for embarkation must be obtained; and the party must
be acquainted with English in order to ask the way to London. Really, I
think the thing very difficult.”

“Not at all,” cried d’Artagnan, who was anxious the matter should be
accomplished; “on the contrary, I think it very easy. It would be, no
doubt, parbleu, if we write to Lord de Winter about affairs of vast
importance, of the horrors of the cardinal--”

“Speak lower!” said Athos.

“--of intrigues and secrets of state,” continued d’Artagnan, complying
with the recommendation. “There can be no doubt we would all be broken
on the wheel; but for God’s sake, do not forget, as you yourself said,
Athos, that we only write to him concerning a family affair; that we
only write to him to entreat that as soon as Milady arrives in London he
will put it out of her power to injure us. I will write to him, then,
nearly in these terms.”

“Let us see,” said Athos, assuming in advance a critical look.

“Monsieur and dear friend--”

“Ah, yes! Dear friend to an Englishman,” interrupted Athos; “well
commenced! Bravo, d’Artagnan! Only with that word you would be quartered
instead of being broken on the wheel.”

“Well, perhaps. I will say, then, Monsieur, quite short.”

“You may even say, My Lord,” replied Athos, who stickled for propriety.

“My Lord, do you remember the little goat pasture of the Luxembourg?”

“Good, the Luxembourg! One might believe this is an allusion to the
queen-mother! That’s ingenious,” said Athos.

“Well, then, we will put simply, My Lord, do you remember a certain
little enclosure where your life was spared?”

“My dear d’Artagnan, you will never make anything but a very bad
secretary. Where your life was spared! For shame! that’s unworthy. A man
of spirit is not to be reminded of such services. A benefit reproached
is an offense committed.”

“The devil!” said d’Artagnan, “you are insupportable. If the letter must
be written under your censure, my faith, I renounce the task.”

“And you will do right. Handle the musket and the sword, my dear fellow.
You will come off splendidly at those two exercises; but pass the pen
over to Monsieur Abbe. That’s his province.”

“Ay, ay!” said Porthos; “pass the pen to Aramis, who writes theses in
Latin.”

“Well, so be it,” said d’Artagnan. “Draw up this note for us, Aramis;
but by our Holy Father the Pope, cut it short, for I shall prune you in
my turn, I warn you.”

“I ask no better,” said Aramis, with that ingenious air of confidence
which every poet has in himself; “but let me be properly acquainted with
the subject. I have heard here and there that this sister-in-law was a
hussy. I have obtained proof of it by listening to her conversation with
the cardinal.”

“Lower! SACRE BLEU!” said Athos.

“But,” continued Aramis, “the details escape me.”

“And me also,” said Porthos.

D’Artagnan and Athos looked at each other for some time in silence. At
length Athos, after serious reflection and becoming more pale than
usual, made a sign of assent to d’Artagnan, who by it understood he was
at liberty to speak.

“Well, this is what you have to say,” said d’Artagnan: “My Lord, your
sister-in-law is an infamous woman, who wished to have you killed that
she might inherit your wealth; but she could not marry your brother,
being already married in France, and having been--” d’Artagnan stopped,
as if seeking for the word, and looked at Athos.

“Repudiated by her husband,” said Athos.

“Because she had been branded,” continued d’Artagnan.

“Bah!” cried Porthos. “Impossible! What do you say--that she wanted to
have her brother-in-law killed?”

“Yes.”

“She was married?” asked Aramis.

“Yes.”

“And her husband found out that she had a fleur-de-lis on her shoulder?”
cried Porthos.

“Yes.”

These three yeses had been pronounced by Athos, each with a sadder
intonation.

“And who has seen this fleur-de-lis?” inquired Aramis.

“d’Artagnan and I. Or rather, to observe the chronological order, I and
d’Artagnan,” replied Athos.

“And does the husband of this frightful creature still live?” said
Aramis.

“He still lives.”

“Are you quite sure of it?”

“I am he.”

There was a moment of cold silence, during which everyone was affected
according to his nature.

“This time,” said Athos, first breaking the silence, “d’Artagnan has
given us an excellent program, and the letter must be written at once.”

“The devil! You are right, Athos,” said Aramis; “and it is a rather
difficult matter. The chancellor himself would be puzzled how to write
such a letter, and yet the chancellor draws up an official report very
readily. Never mind! Be silent, I will write.”

Aramis accordingly took the quill, reflected for a few moments, wrote
eight or ten lines in a charming little female hand, and then with a
voice soft and slow, as if each word had been scrupulously weighed, he
read the following:

“My Lord, The person who writes these few lines had the honor of
crossing swords with you in the little enclosure of the Rue d’Enfer. As
you have several times since declared yourself the friend of that
person, he thinks it his duty to respond to that friendship by sending
you important information. Twice you have nearly been the victim of a
near relative, whom you believe to be your heir because you are ignorant
that before she contracted a marriage in England she was already married
in France. But the third time, which is the present, you may succumb.
Your relative left La Rochelle for England during the night. Watch her
arrival, for she has great and terrible projects. If you require to know
positively what she is capable of, read her past history on her left
shoulder.”

“Well, now that will do wonderfully well,” said Athos. “My dear Aramis,
you have the pen of a secretary of state. Lord de Winter will now be
upon his guard if the letter should reach him; and even if it should
fall into the hands of the cardinal, we shall not be compromised. But as
the lackey who goes may make us believe he has been to London and may
stop at Chatellerault, let us give him only half the sum promised him,
with the letter, with an agreement that he shall have the other half in
exchange for the reply. Have you the diamond?” continued Athos.

“I have what is still better. I have the price;” and d’Artagnan threw
the bag upon the table. At the sound of the gold Aramis raised his eyes
and Porthos started. As to Athos, he remained unmoved.

“How much in that little bag?”

“Seven thousand livres, in louis of twelve francs.”

“Seven thousand livres!” cried Porthos. “That poor little diamond was
worth seven thousand livres?”

“It appears so,” said Athos, “since here they are. I don’t suppose that
our friend d’Artagnan has added any of his own to the amount.”

“But, gentlemen, in all this,” said d’Artagnan, “we do not think of the
queen. Let us take some heed of the welfare of her dear Buckingham. That
is the least we owe her.”

“That’s true,” said Athos; “but that concerns Aramis.”

“Well,” replied the latter, blushing, “what must I say?”

“Oh, that’s simple enough!” replied Athos. “Write a second letter for
that clever personage who lives at Tours.”

Aramis resumed his pen, reflected a little, and wrote the following
lines, which he immediately submitted to the approbation of his friends.

“My dear cousin.”

“Ah, ah!” said Athos. “This clever person is your relative, then?”

“Cousin-german.”

“Go on, to your cousin, then!”

Aramis continued:

“My dear Cousin, His Eminence, the cardinal, whom God preserve for the
happiness of France and the confusion of the enemies of the kingdom, is
on the point of putting an end to the hectic rebellion of La Rochelle.
It is probable that the succor of the English fleet will never even
arrive in sight of the place. I will even venture to say that I am
certain M. de Buckingham will be prevented from setting out by some
great event. His Eminence is the most illustrious politician of times
past, of times present, and probably of times to come. He would
extinguish the sun if the sun incommoded him. Give these happy tidings
to your sister, my dear cousin. I have dreamed that the unlucky
Englishman was dead. I cannot recollect whether it was by steel or by
poison; only of this I am sure, I have dreamed he was dead, and you know
my dreams never deceive me. Be assured, then, of seeing me soon return.”

“Capital!” cried Athos; “you are the king of poets, my dear Aramis. You
speak like the Apocalypse, and you are as true as the Gospel. There is
nothing now to do but to put the address to this letter.”

“That is easily done,” said Aramis.

He folded the letter fancifully, and took up his pen and wrote:

“To Mlle. Michon, seamstress, Tours.”

The three friends looked at one another and laughed; they were caught.

“Now,” said Aramis, “you will please to understand, gentlemen, that
Bazin alone can carry this letter to Tours. My cousin knows nobody but
Bazin, and places confidence in nobody but him; any other person would
fail. Besides, Bazin is ambitious and learned; Bazin has read history,
gentlemen, he knows that Sixtus the Fifth became Pope after having kept
pigs. Well, as he means to enter the Church at the same time as myself,
he does not despair of becoming Pope in his turn, or at least a
cardinal. You can understand that a man who has such views will never
allow himself to be taken, or if taken, will undergo martyrdom rather
than speak.”

“Very well,” said d’Artagnan, “I consent to Bazin with all my heart, but
grant me Planchet. Milady had him one day turned out of doors, with
sundry blows of a good stick to accelerate his motions. Now, Planchet
has an excellent memory; and I will be bound that sooner than relinquish
any possible means of vengeance, he will allow himself to be beaten to
death. If your arrangements at Tours are your arrangements, Aramis,
those of London are mine. I request, then, that Planchet may be chosen,
more particularly as he has already been to London with me, and knows
how to speak correctly: London, sir, if you please, and my master, Lord
d’Artagnan. With that you may be satisfied he can make his way, both
going and returning.”

“In that case,” said Athos, “Planchet must receive seven hundred livres
for going, and seven hundred livres for coming back; and Bazin, three
hundred livres for going, and three hundred livres for returning--that
will reduce the sum to five thousand livres. We will each take a
thousand livres to be employed as seems good, and we will leave a fund
of a thousand livres under the guardianship of Monsieur Abbe here, for
extraordinary occasions or common wants. Will that do?”

“My dear Athos,” said Aramis, “you speak like Nestor, who was, as
everyone knows, the wisest among the Greeks.”

“Well, then,” said Athos, “it is agreed. Planchet and Bazin shall go.
Everything considered, I am not sorry to retain Grimaud; he is
accustomed to my ways, and I am particular. Yesterday’s affair must have
shaken him a little; his voyage would upset him quite.”

Planchet was sent for, and instructions were given him. The matter had
been named to him by d’Artagnan, who in the first place pointed out the
money to him, then the glory, and then the danger.

“I will carry the letter in the lining of my coat,” said Planchet; “and
if I am taken I will swallow it.”

“Well, but then you will not be able to fulfill your commission,” said
d’Artagnan.

“You will give me a copy this evening, which I shall know by heart
tomorrow.”

D’Artagnan looked at his friends, as if to say, “Well, what did I tell
you?”

“Now,” continued he, addressing Planchet, “you have eight days to get an
interview with Lord de Winter; you have eight days to return--in all
sixteen days. If, on the sixteenth day after your departure, at eight
o’clock in the evening you are not here, no money--even if it be but
five minutes past eight.”

“Then, monsieur,” said Planchet, “you must buy me a watch.”

“Take this,” said Athos, with his usual careless generosity, giving him
his own, “and be a good lad. Remember, if you talk, if you babble, if
you get drunk, you risk your master’s head, who has so much confidence
in your fidelity, and who answers for you. But remember, also, that if
by your fault any evil happens to d’Artagnan, I will find you, wherever
you may be, for the purpose of ripping up your belly.”

“Oh, monsieur!” said Planchet, humiliated by the suspicion, and
moreover, terrified at the calm air of the Musketeer.

“And I,” said Porthos, rolling his large eyes, “remember, I will skin
you alive.”

“Ah, monsieur!”

“And I,” said Aramis, with his soft, melodius voice, “remember that I
will roast you at a slow fire, like a savage.”

“Ah, monsieur!”

Planchet began to weep. We will not venture to say whether it was from
terror created by the threats or from tenderness at seeing four friends
so closely united.

D’Artagnan took his hand. “See, Planchet,” said he, “these gentlemen
only say this out of affection for me, but at bottom they all like you.”

“Ah, monsieur,” said Planchet, “I will succeed or I will consent to be
cut in quarters; and if they do cut me in quarters, be assured that not
a morsel of me will speak.”

It was decided that Planchet should set out the next day, at eight
o’clock in the morning, in order, as he had said, that he might during
the night learn the letter by heart. He gained just twelve hours by this
engagement; he was to be back on the sixteenth day, by eight o’clock in
the evening.

In the morning, as he was mounting his horse, d’Artagnan, who felt at
the bottom of his heart a partiality for the duke, took Planchet aside.

“Listen,” said he to him. “When you have given the letter to Lord de
Winter and he has read it, you will further say to him: Watch over his
Grace Lord Buckingham, for they wish to assassinate him. But this,
Planchet, is so serious and important that I have not informed my
friends that I would entrust this secret to you; and for a captain’s
commission I would not write it.”

“Be satisfied, monsieur,” said Planchet, “you shall see if confidence
can be placed in me.”

Mounted on an excellent horse, which he was to leave at the end of
twenty leagues in order to take the post, Planchet set off at a gallop,
his spirits a little depressed by the triple promise made him by the
Musketeers, but otherwise as light-hearted as possible.

Bazin set out the next day for Tours, and was allowed eight days for
performing his commission.

The four friends, during the period of these two absences, had, as may
well be supposed, the eye on the watch, the nose to the wind, and the
ear on the hark. Their days were passed in endeavoring to catch all that
was said, in observing the proceeding of the cardinal, and in looking
out for all the couriers who arrived. More than once an involuntary
trembling seized them when called upon for some unexpected service. They
had, besides, to look constantly to their own proper safety; Milady was
a phantom which, when it had once appeared to people, did not allow them
to sleep very quietly.

On the morning of the eighth day, Bazin, fresh as ever, and smiling,
according to custom, entered the cabaret of the Parpaillot as the four
friends were sitting down to breakfast, saying, as had been agreed upon:
“Monsieur Aramis, the answer from your cousin.”

The four friends exchanged a joyful glance; half of the work was done.
It is true, however, that it was the shorter and easier part.

Aramis, blushing in spite of himself, took the letter, which was in a
large, coarse hand and not particular for its orthography.

“Good God!” cried he, laughing, “I quite despair of my poor Michon; she
will never write like Monsieur de Voiture.”

“What does you mean by boor Michon?” said the Swiss, who was chatting
with the four friends when the letter came.

“Oh, pardieu, less than nothing,” said Aramis; “a charming little
seamstress, whom I love dearly and from whose hand I requested a few
lines as a sort of keepsake.”

“The duvil!” said the Swiss, “if she is as great a lady as her writing
is large, you are a lucky fellow, gomrade!”

Aramis read the letter, and passed it to Athos.

“See what she writes to me, Athos,” said he.

Athos cast a glance over the epistle, and to disperse all the suspicions
that might have been created, read aloud:

“My cousin,

“My sister and I are skillful in interpreting dreams, and even entertain
great fear of them; but of yours it may be said, I hope, every dream is
an illusion. Adieu! Take care of yourself, and act so that we may from
time to time hear you spoken of.

“MARIE MICHON”

“And what dream does she mean?” asked the dragoon, who had approached
during the reading.

“Yez; what’s the dream?” said the Swiss.

“Well, pardieu!” said Aramis, “it was only this: I had a dream, and I
related it to her.”

“Yez, yez,” said the Swiss; “it’s simple enough to dell a dream, but I
neffer dream.”

“You are very fortunate,” said Athos, rising; “I wish I could say as
much!”

“Neffer,” replied the Swiss, enchanted that a man like Athos could envy
him anything. “Neffer, neffer!”

D’Artagnan, seeing Athos rise, did likewise, took his arm, and went out.

Porthos and Aramis remained behind to encounter the jokes of the dragoon
and the Swiss.

As to Bazin, he went and lay down on a truss of straw; and as he had
more imagination than the Swiss, he dreamed that Aramis, having become
pope, adorned his head with a cardinal’s hat.

But, as we have said, Bazin had not, by his fortunate return, removed
more than a part of the uneasiness which weighed upon the four friends.
The days of expectation are long, and d’Artagnan, in particular, would
have wagered that the days were forty-four hours. He forgot the
necessary slowness of navigation; he exaggerated to himself the power of
Milady. He credited this woman, who appeared to him the equal of a
demon, with agents as supernatural as herself; at the least noise, he
imagined himself about to be arrested, and that Planchet was being
brought back to be confronted with himself and his friends. Still
further, his confidence in the worthy Picard, at one time so great,
diminished day by day. This anxiety became so great that it even
extended to Aramis and Porthos. Athos alone remained unmoved, as if no
danger hovered over him, and as if he breathed his customary atmosphere.

On the sixteenth day, in particular, these signs were so strong in
d’Artagnan and his two friends that they could not remain quiet in one
place, and wandered about like ghosts on the road by which Planchet was
expected.

“Really,” said Athos to them, “you are not men but children, to let a
woman terrify you so! And what does it amount to, after all? To be
imprisoned. Well, but we should be taken out of prison; Madame Bonacieux
was released. To be decapitated? Why, every day in the trenches we go
cheerfully to expose ourselves to worse than that--for a bullet may
break a leg, and I am convinced a surgeon would give us more pain in
cutting off a thigh than an executioner in cutting off a head. Wait
quietly, then; in two hours, in four, in six hours at latest, Planchet
will be here. He promised to be here, and I have very great faith in
Planchet, who appears to me to be a very good lad.”

“But if he does not come?” said d’Artagnan.

“Well, if he does not come, it will be because he has been delayed,
that’s all. He may have fallen from his horse, he may have cut a caper
from the deck; he may have traveled so fast against the wind as to have
brought on a violent catarrh. Eh, gentlemen, let us reckon upon
accidents! Life is a chaplet of little miseries which the philosopher
counts with a smile. Be philosophers, as I am, gentlemen; sit down at
the table and let us drink. Nothing makes the future look so bright as
surveying it through a glass of chambertin.”

“That’s all very well,” replied d’Artagnan; “but I am tired of fearing
when I open a fresh bottle that the wine may come from the cellar of
Milady.”

“You are very fastidious,” said Athos; “such a beautiful woman!”

“A woman of mark!” said Porthos, with his loud laugh.

Athos started, passed his hand over his brow to remove the drops of
perspiration that burst forth, and rose in his turn with a nervous
movement he could not repress.

The day, however, passed away; and the evening came on slowly, but
finally it came. The bars were filled with drinkers. Athos, who had
pocketed his share of the diamond, seldom quit the Parpaillot. He had
found in M. de Busigny, who, by the by, had given them a magnificent
dinner, a partner worthy of his company. They were playing together, as
usual, when seven o’clock sounded; the patrol was heard passing to
double the posts. At half past seven the retreat was sounded.

“We are lost,” said d’Artagnan, in the ear of Athos.

“You mean to say we have lost,” said Athos, quietly, drawing four
pistoles from his pocket and throwing them upon the table. “Come,
gentlemen,” said he, “they are beating the tattoo. Let us to bed!”

And Athos went out of the Parpaillot, followed by d’Artagnan. Aramis
came behind, giving his arm to Porthos. Aramis mumbled verses to
himself, and Porthos from time to time pulled a hair or two from his
mustache, in sign of despair.

But all at once a shadow appeared in the darkness the outline of which
was familiar to d’Artagnan, and a well-known voice said, “Monsieur, I
have brought your cloak; it is chilly this evening.”

“Planchet!” cried d’Artagnan, beside himself with joy.

“Planchet!” repeated Aramis and Porthos.

“Well, yes, Planchet, to be sure,” said Athos, “what is there so
astonishing in that? He promised to be back by eight o’clock, and eight
is striking. Bravo, Planchet, you are a lad of your word, and if ever
you leave your master, I will promise you a place in my service.”

“Oh, no, never,” said Planchet, “I will never leave Monsieur
d’Artagnan.”

At the same time d’Artagnan felt that Planchet slipped a note into his
hand.

D’Artagnan felt a strong inclination to embrace Planchet as he had
embraced him on his departure; but he feared lest this mark of
affection, bestowed upon his lackey in the open street, might appear
extraordinary to passers-by, and he restrained himself.

“I have the note,” said he to Athos and to his friends.

“That’s well,” said Athos, “let us go home and read it.”

The note burned the hand of d’Artagnan. He wished to hasten their steps;
but Athos took his arm and passed it under his own, and the young man
was forced to regulate his pace by that of his friend.

At length they reached the tent, lit a lamp, and while Planchet stood at
the entrance that the four friends might not be surprised, d’Artagnan,
with a trembling hand, broke the seal and opened the so anxiously
expected letter.

It contained half a line, in a hand perfectly British, and with a
conciseness as perfectly Spartan:

Thank you; be easy.

d’Artagnan translated this for the others.

Athos took the letter from the hands of d’Artagnan, approached the lamp,
set fire to the paper, and did not let go till it was reduced to a
cinder.

Then, calling Planchet, he said, “Now, my lad, you may claim your seven
hundred livres, but you did not run much risk with such a note as that.”

“I am not to blame for having tried every means to compress it,” said
Planchet.

“Well!” cried d’Artagnan, “tell us all about it.”

“Dame, that’s a long job, monsieur.”

“You are right, Planchet,” said Athos; “besides, the tattoo has been
sounded, and we should be observed if we kept a light burning much
longer than the others.”

“So be it,” said d’Artagnan. “Go to bed, Planchet, and sleep soundly.”

“My faith, monsieur! that will be the first time I have done so for
sixteen days.”

“And me, too!” said d’Artagnan.

“And me, too!” said Porthos.

“And me, too!” said Aramis.

“Well, if you will have the truth, and me, too!” said Athos.




49 FATALITY


Meantime Milady, drunk with passion, roaring on the deck like a lioness
that has been embarked, had been tempted to throw herself into the sea
that she might regain the coast, for she could not get rid of the
thought that she had been insulted by d’Artagnan, threatened by Athos,
and that she had quit France without being revenged on them. This idea
soon became so insupportable to her that at the risk of whatever
terrible consequences might result to herself from it, she implored the
captain to put her on shore; but the captain, eager to escape from his
false position--placed between French and English cruisers, like the bat
between the mice and the birds--was in great haste to regain England,
and positively refused to obey what he took for a woman’s caprice,
promising his passenger, who had been particularly recommended to him by
the cardinal, to land her, if the sea and the French permitted him, at
one of the ports of Brittany, either at Lorient or Brest. But the wind
was contrary, the sea bad; they tacked and kept offshore. Nine days
after leaving the Charente, pale with fatigue and vexation, Milady saw
only the blue coasts of Finisterre appear.

She calculated that to cross this corner of France and return to the
cardinal it would take her at least three days. Add another day for
landing, and that would make four. Add these four to the nine others,
that would be thirteen days lost--thirteen days, during which so many
important events might pass in London. She reflected likewise that the
cardinal would be furious at her return, and consequently would be more
disposed to listen to the complaints brought against her than to the
accusations she brought against others.

She allowed the vessel to pass Lorient and Brest without repeating her
request to the captain, who, on his part, took care not to remind her of
it. Milady therefore continued her voyage, and on the very day that
Planchet embarked at Portsmouth for France, the messenger of his
Eminence entered the port in triumph.

All the city was agitated by an extraordinary movement. Four large
vessels, recently built, had just been launched. At the end of the
jetty, his clothes richly laced with gold, glittering, as was customary
with him, with diamonds and precious stones, his hat ornamented with a
white feather which drooped upon his shoulder, Buckingham was seen
surrounded by a staff almost as brilliant as himself.

It was one of those rare and beautiful days in winter when England
remembers that there is a sun. The star of day, pale but nevertheless
still splendid, was setting in the horizon, glorifying at once the
heavens and the sea with bands of fire, and casting upon the towers and
the old houses of the city a last ray of gold which made the windows
sparkle like the reflection of a conflagration. Breathing that sea
breeze, so much more invigorating and balsamic as the land is
approached, contemplating all the power of those preparations she was
commissioned to destroy, all the power of that army which she was to
combat alone--she, a woman with a few bags of gold--Milady compared
herself mentally to Judith, the terrible Jewess, when she penetrated the
camp of the Assyrians and beheld the enormous mass of chariots, horses,
men, and arms, which a gesture of her hand was to dissipate like a cloud
of smoke.

They entered the roadstead; but as they drew near in order to cast
anchor, a little cutter, looking like a coastguard formidably armed,
approached the merchant vessel and dropped into the sea a boat which
directed its course to the ladder. This boat contained an officer, a
mate, and eight rowers. The officer alone went on board, where he was
received with all the deference inspired by the uniform.

The officer conversed a few instants with the captain, gave him several
papers, of which he was the bearer, to read, and upon the order of the
merchant captain the whole crew of the vessel, both passengers and
sailors, were called upon deck.

When this species of summons was made the officer inquired aloud the
point of the brig’s departure, its route, its landings; and to all these
questions the captain replied without difficulty and without hesitation.
Then the officer began to pass in review all the people, one after the
other, and stopping when he came to Milady, surveyed her very closely,
but without addressing a single word to her.

He then returned to the captain, said a few words to him, and as if from
that moment the vessel was under his command, he ordered a maneuver
which the crew executed immediately. Then the vessel resumed its course,
still escorted by the little cutter, which sailed side by side with it,
menacing it with the mouths of its six cannon. The boat followed in the
wake of the ship, a speck near the enormous mass.

During the examination of Milady by the officer, as may well be
imagined, Milady on her part was not less scrutinizing in her glances.
But however great was the power of this woman with eyes of flame in
reading the hearts of those whose secrets she wished to divine, she met
this time with a countenance of such impassivity that no discovery
followed her investigation. The officer who had stopped in front of her
and studied her with so much care might have been twenty-five or
twenty-six years of age. He was of pale complexion, with clear blue
eyes, rather deeply set; his mouth, fine and well cut, remained
motionless in its correct lines; his chin, strongly marked, denoted that
strength of will which in the ordinary Britannic type denotes mostly
nothing but obstinacy; a brow a little receding, as is proper for poets,
enthusiasts, and soldiers, was scarcely shaded by short thin hair which,
like the beard which covered the lower part of his face, was of a
beautiful deep chestnut color.

When they entered the port, it was already night. The fog increased the
darkness, and formed round the sternlights and lanterns of the jetty a
circle like that which surrounds the moon when the weather threatens to
become rainy. The air they breathed was heavy, damp, and cold.

Milady, that woman so courageous and firm, shivered in spite of herself.

The officer desired to have Milady’s packages pointed out to him, and
ordered them to be placed in the boat. When this operation was complete,
he invited her to descend by offering her his hand.

Milady looked at this man, and hesitated. “Who are you, sir,” asked she,
“who has the kindness to trouble yourself so particularly on my
account?”

“You may perceive, madame, by my uniform, that I am an officer in the
English navy,” replied the young man.

“But is it the custom for the officers in the English navy to place
themselves at the service of their female compatriots when they land in
a port of Great Britain, and carry their gallantry so far as to conduct
them ashore?”

“Yes, madame, it is the custom, not from gallantry but prudence, that in
time of war foreigners should be conducted to particular hotels, in
order that they may remain under the eye of the government until full
information can be obtained about them.”

These words were pronounced with the most exact politeness and the most
perfect calmness. Nevertheless, they had not the power of convincing
Milady.

“But I am not a foreigner, sir,” said she, with an accent as pure as
ever was heard between Portsmouth and Manchester; “my name is Lady
Clarik, and this measure--”

“This measure is general, madame; and you will seek in vain to evade
it.”

“I will follow you, then, sir.”

Accepting the hand of the officer, she began the descent of the ladder,
at the foot of which the boat waited. The officer followed her. A large
cloak was spread at the stern; the officer requested her to sit down
upon this cloak, and placed himself beside her.

“Row!” said he to the sailors.

The eight oars fell at once into the sea, making but a single sound,
giving but a single stroke, and the boat seemed to fly over the surface
of the water.

In five minutes they gained the land.

The officer leaped to the pier, and offered his hand to Milady. A
carriage was in waiting.

“Is this carriage for us?” asked Milady.

“Yes, madame,” replied the officer.

“The hotel, then, is far away?”

“At the other end of the town.”

“Very well,” said Milady; and she resolutely entered the carriage.

The officer saw that the baggage was fastened carefully behind the
carriage; and this operation ended, he took his place beside Milady, and
shut the door.

Immediately, without any order being given or his place of destination
indicated, the coachman set off at a rapid pace, and plunged into the
streets of the city.

So strange a reception naturally gave Milady ample matter for
reflection; so seeing that the young officer did not seem at all
disposed for conversation, she reclined in her corner of the carriage,
and one after the other passed in review all the surmises which
presented themselves to her mind.

At the end of a quarter of an hour, however, surprised at the length of
the journey, she leaned forward toward the door to see whither she was
being conducted. Houses were no longer to be seen; trees appeared in the
darkness like great black phantoms chasing one another. Milady
shuddered.

“But we are no longer in the city, sir,” said she.

The young officer preserved silence.

“I beg you to understand, sir, I will go no farther unless you tell me
whither you are taking me.”

This threat brought no reply.

“Oh, this is too much,” cried Milady. “Help! help!”

No voice replied to hers; the carriage continued to roll on with
rapidity; the officer seemed a statue.

Milady looked at the officer with one of those terrible expressions
peculiar to her countenance, and which so rarely failed of their effect;
anger made her eyes flash in the darkness.

The young man remained immovable.

Milady tried to open the door in order to throw herself out.

“Take care, madame,” said the young man, coolly, “you will kill yourself
in jumping.”

Milady reseated herself, foaming. The officer leaned forward, looked at
her in his turn, and appeared surprised to see that face, just before so
beautiful, distorted with passion and almost hideous. The artful
creature at once comprehended that she was injuring herself by allowing
him thus to read her soul; she collected her features, and in a
complaining voice said: “In the name of heaven, sir, tell me if it is to
you, if it is to your government, if it is to an enemy I am to attribute
the violence that is done me?”

“No violence will be offered to you, madame, and what happens to you is
the result of a very simple measure which we are obliged to adopt with
all who land in England.”

“Then you don’t know me, sir?”

“It is the first time I have had the honor of seeing you.”

“And on your honor, you have no cause of hatred against me?”

“None, I swear to you.”

There was so much serenity, coolness, mildness even, in the voice of the
young man, that Milady felt reassured.

At length after a journey of nearly an hour, the carriage stopped before
an iron gate, which closed an avenue leading to a castle severe in form,
massive, and isolated. Then, as the wheels rolled over a fine gravel,
Milady could hear a vast roaring, which she at once recognized as the
noise of the sea dashing against some steep cliff.

The carriage passed under two arched gateways, and at length stopped in
a court large, dark, and square. Almost immediately the door of the
carriage was opened, the young man sprang lightly out and presented his
hand to Milady, who leaned upon it, and in her turn alighted with
tolerable calmness.

“Still, then, I am a prisoner,” said Milady, looking around her, and
bringing back her eyes with a most gracious smile to the young officer;
“but I feel assured it will not be for long,” added she. “My own
conscience and your politeness, sir, are the guarantees of that.”

However flattering this compliment, the officer made no reply; but
drawing from his belt a little silver whistle, such as boatswains use in
ships of war, he whistled three times, with three different modulations.
Immediately several men appeared, who unharnessed the smoking horses,
and put the carriage into a coach house.

Then the officer, with the same calm politeness, invited his prisoner to
enter the house. She, with a still-smiling countenance, took his arm,
and passed with him under a low arched door, which by a vaulted passage,
lighted only at the farther end, led to a stone staircase around an
angle of stone. They then came to a massive door, which after the
introduction into the lock of a key which the young man carried with
him, turned heavily upon its hinges, and disclosed the chamber destined
for Milady.

With a single glance the prisoner took in the apartment in its minutest
details. It was a chamber whose furniture was at once appropriate for a
prisoner or a free man; and yet bars at the windows and outside bolts at
the door decided the question in favor of the prison.

In an instant all the strength of mind of this creature, though drawn
from the most vigorous sources, abandoned her; she sank into a large
easy chair, with her arms crossed, her head lowered, and expecting every
instant to see a judge enter to interrogate her.

But no one entered except two or three marines, who brought her trunks
and packages, deposited them in a corner, and retired without speaking.

The officer superintended all these details with the same calmness
Milady had constantly seen in him, never pronouncing a word himself, and
making himself obeyed by a gesture of his hand or a sound of his
whistle.

It might have been said that between this man and his inferiors spoken
language did not exist, or had become useless.

At length Milady could hold out no longer; she broke the silence. “In
the name of heaven, sir,” cried she, “what means all that is passing?
Put an end to my doubts; I have courage enough for any danger I can
foresee, for every misfortune which I understand. Where am I, and why am
I here? If I am free, why these bars and these doors? If I am a
prisoner, what crime have I committed?”

“You are here in the apartment destined for you, madame. I received
orders to go and take charge of you on the sea, and to conduct you to
this castle. This order I believe I have accomplished with all the
exactness of a soldier, but also with the courtesy of a gentleman. There
terminates, at least to the present moment, the duty I had to fulfill
toward you; the rest concerns another person.”

“And who is that other person?” asked Milady, warmly. “Can you not tell
me his name?”

At the moment a great jingling of spurs was heard on the stairs. Some
voices passed and faded away, and the sound of a single footstep
approached the door.

“That person is here, madame,” said the officer, leaving the entrance
open, and drawing himself up in an attitude of respect.

At the same time the door opened; a man appeared on the threshold. He
was without a hat, carried a sword, and flourished a handkerchief in his
hand.

Milady thought she recognized this shadow in the gloom; she supported
herself with one hand upon the arm of the chair, and advanced her head
as if to meet a certainty.

The stranger advanced slowly, and as he advanced, after entering into
the circle of light projected by the lamp, Milady involuntarily drew
back.

Then when she had no longer any doubt, she cried, in a state of stupor,
“What, my brother, is it you?”

“Yes, fair lady!” replied Lord de Winter, making a bow, half courteous,
half ironical; “it is I, myself.”

“But this castle, then?”

“Is mine.”

“This chamber?”

“Is yours.”

“I am, then, your prisoner?”

“Nearly so.”

“But this is a frightful abuse of power!”

“No high-sounding words! Let us sit down and chat quietly, as brother
and sister ought to do.”

Then, turning toward the door, and seeing that the young officer was
waiting for his last orders, he said. “All is well, I thank you; now
leave us alone, Mr. Felton.”




50 CHAT BETWEEN BROTHER AND SISTER


During the time which Lord de Winter took to shut the door, close a
shutter, and draw a chair near to his sister-in-law’s fauteuil, Milady,
anxiously thoughtful, plunged her glance into the depths of possibility,
and discovered all the plan, of which she could not even obtain a glance
as long as she was ignorant into whose hands she had fallen. She knew
her brother-in-law to be a worthy gentleman, a bold hunter, an intrepid
player, enterprising with women, but by no means remarkable for his
skill in intrigues. How had he discovered her arrival, and caused her to
be seized? Why did he detain her?

Athos had dropped some words which proved that the conversation she had
with the cardinal had fallen into outside ears; but she could not
suppose that he had dug a countermine so promptly and so boldly. She
rather feared that her preceding operations in England might have been
discovered. Buckingham might have guessed that it was she who had cut
off the two studs, and avenge himself for that little treachery; but
Buckingham was incapable of going to any excess against a woman,
particularly if that woman was supposed to have acted from a feeling of
jealousy.

This supposition appeared to her most reasonable. It seemed to her that
they wanted to revenge the past, and not to anticipate the future. At
all events, she congratulated herself upon having fallen into the hands
of her brother-in-law, with whom she reckoned she could deal very
easily, rather than into the hands of an acknowledged and intelligent
enemy.

“Yes, let us chat, brother,” said she, with a kind of cheerfulness,
decided as she was to draw from the conversation, in spite of all the
dissimulation Lord de Winter could bring, the revelations of which she
stood in need to regulate her future conduct.

“You have, then, decided to come to England again,” said Lord de Winter,
“in spite of the resolutions you so often expressed in Paris never to
set your feet on British ground?”

Milady replied to this question by another question. “To begin with,
tell me,” said she, “how have you watched me so closely as to be aware
beforehand not only of my arrival, but even of the day, the hour, and
the port at which I should arrive?”

Lord de Winter adopted the same tactics as Milady, thinking that as his
sister-in-law employed them they must be the best.

“But tell me, my dear sister,” replied he, “what makes you come to
England?”

“I come to see you,” replied Milady, without knowing how much she
aggravated by this reply the suspicions to which d’Artagnan’s letter had
given birth in the mind of her brother-in-law, and only desiring to gain
the good will of her auditor by a falsehood.

“Ah, to see me?” said de Winter, cunningly.

“To be sure, to see you. What is there astonishing in that?”

“And you had no other object in coming to England but to see me?”

“No.”

“So it was for me alone you have taken the trouble to cross the
Channel?”

“For you alone.”

“The deuce! What tenderness, my sister!”

“But am I not your nearest relative?” demanded Milady, with a tone of
the most touching ingenuousness.

“And my only heir, are you not?” said Lord de Winter in his turn, fixing
his eyes on those of Milady.

Whatever command she had over herself, Milady could not help starting;
and as in pronouncing the last words Lord de Winter placed his hand upon
the arm of his sister, this start did not escape him.

In fact, the blow was direct and severe. The first idea that occurred to
Milady’s mind was that she had been betrayed by Kitty, and that she had
recounted to the baron the selfish aversion toward himself of which she
had imprudently allowed some marks to escape before her servant. She
also recollected the furious and imprudent attack she had made upon
d’Artagnan when he spared the life of her brother.

“I do not understand, my Lord,” said she, in order to gain time and make
her adversary speak out. “What do you mean to say? Is there any secret
meaning concealed beneath your words?”

“Oh, my God, no!” said Lord de Winter, with apparent good nature. “You
wish to see me, and you come to England. I learn this desire, or rather
I suspect that you feel it; and in order to spare you all the annoyances
of a nocturnal arrival in a port and all the fatigues of landing, I send
one of my officers to meet you, I place a carriage at his orders, and he
brings you hither to this castle, of which I am governor, whither I come
every day, and where, in order to satisfy our mutual desire of seeing
each other, I have prepared you a chamber. What is there more
astonishing in all that I have said to you than in what you have told
me?”

“No; what I think astonishing is that you should expect my coming.”

“And yet that is the most simple thing in the world, my dear sister.
Have you not observed that the captain of your little vessel, on
entering the roadstead, sent forward, in order to obtain permission to
enter the port, a little boat bearing his logbook and the register of
his voyagers? I am commandant of the port. They brought me that book. I
recognized your name in it. My heart told me what your mouth has just
confirmed--that is to say, with what view you have exposed yourself to
the dangers of a sea so perilous, or at least so troublesome at this
moment--and I sent my cutter to meet you. You know the rest.”

Milady knew that Lord de Winter lied, and she was the more alarmed.

“My brother,” continued she, “was not that my Lord Buckingham whom I saw
on the jetty this evening as we arrived?”

“Himself. Ah, I can understand how the sight of him struck you,” replied
Lord de Winter. “You came from a country where he must be very much
talked of, and I know that his armaments against France greatly engage
the attention of your friend the cardinal.”

“My friend the cardinal!” cried Milady, seeing that on this point as on
the other Lord de Winter seemed well instructed.

“Is he not your friend?” replied the baron, negligently. “Ah, pardon! I
thought so; but we will return to my Lord Duke presently. Let us not
depart from the sentimental turn our conversation had taken. You came,
you say, to see me?”

“Yes.”

“Well, I reply that you shall be served to the height of your wishes,
and that we shall see each other every day.”

“Am I, then, to remain here eternally?” demanded Milady, with a certain
terror.

“Do you find yourself badly lodged, sister? Demand anything you want,
and I will hasten to have you furnished with it.”

“But I have neither my women nor my servants.”

“You shall have all, madame. Tell me on what footing your household was
established by your first husband, and although I am only your
brother-in-law, I will arrange one similar.”

“My first husband!” cried Milady, looking at Lord de Winter with eyes
almost starting from their sockets.

“Yes, your French husband. I don’t speak of my brother. If you have
forgotten, as he is still living, I can write to him and he will send me
information on the subject.”

A cold sweat burst from the brow of Milady.

“You jest!” said she, in a hollow voice.

“Do I look so?” asked the baron, rising and going a step backward.

“Or rather you insult me,” continued she, pressing with her stiffened
hands the two arms of her easy chair, and raising herself upon her
wrists.

“I insult you!” said Lord de Winter, with contempt. “In truth, madame,
do you think that can be possible?”

“Indeed, sir,” said Milady, “you must be either drunk or mad. Leave the
room, and send me a woman.”

“Women are very indiscreet, my sister. Cannot I serve you as a waiting
maid? By that means all our secrets will remain in the family.”

“Insolent!” cried Milady; and as if acted upon by a spring, she bounded
toward the baron, who awaited her attack with his arms crossed, but
nevertheless with one hand on the hilt of his sword.

“Come!” said he. “I know you are accustomed to assassinate people; but I
warn you I shall defend myself, even against you.”

“You are right,” said Milady. “You have all the appearance of being
cowardly enough to lift your hand against a woman.”

“Perhaps so; and I have an excuse, for mine would not be the first hand
of a man that has been placed upon you, I imagine.”

And the baron pointed, with a slow and accusing gesture, to the left
shoulder of Milady, which he almost touched with his finger.

Milady uttered a deep, inward shriek, and retreated to a corner of the
room like a panther which crouches for a spring.

“Oh, growl as much as you please,” cried Lord de Winter, “but don’t try
to bite, for I warn you that it would be to your disadvantage. There are
here no procurators who regulate successions beforehand. There is no
knight-errant to come and seek a quarrel with me on account of the fair
lady I detain a prisoner; but I have judges quite ready who will quickly
dispose of a woman so shameless as to glide, a bigamist, into the bed of
Lord de Winter, my brother. And these judges, I warn you, will soon send
you to an executioner who will make both your shoulders alike.”

The eyes of Milady darted such flashes that although he was a man and
armed before an unarmed woman, he felt the chill of fear glide through
his whole frame. However, he continued all the same, but with increasing
warmth: “Yes, I can very well understand that after having inherited the
fortune of my brother it would be very agreeable to you to be my heir
likewise; but know beforehand, if you kill me or cause me to be killed,
my precautions are taken. Not a penny of what I possess will pass into
your hands. Were you not already rich enough--you who possess nearly a
million? And could you not stop your fatal career, if you did not do
evil for the infinite and supreme joy of doing it? Oh, be assured, if
the memory of my brother were not sacred to me, you should rot in a
state dungeon or satisfy the curiosity of sailors at Tyburn. I will be
silent, but you must endure your captivity quietly. In fifteen or twenty
days I shall set out for La Rochelle with the army; but on the eve of my
departure a vessel which I shall see depart will take you hence and
convey you to our colonies in the south. And be assured that you shall
be accompanied by one who will blow your brains out at the first attempt
you make to return to England or the Continent.”

Milady listened with an attention that dilated her inflamed eyes.

“Yes, at present,” continued Lord de Winter, “you will remain in this
castle. The walls are thick, the doors strong, and the bars solid;
besides, your window opens immediately over the sea. The men of my crew,
who are devoted to me for life and death, mount guard around this
apartment, and watch all the passages that lead to the courtyard. Even
if you gained the yard, there would still be three iron gates for you to
pass. The order is positive. A step, a gesture, a word, on your part,
denoting an effort to escape, and you are to be fired upon. If they kill
you, English justice will be under an obligation to me for having saved
it trouble. Ah! I see your features regain their calmness, your
countenance recovers its assurance. You are saying to yourself: ‘Fifteen
days, twenty days? Bah! I have an inventive mind; before that is expired
some idea will occur to me. I have an infernal spirit. I shall meet with
a victim. Before fifteen days are gone by I shall be away from here.’
Ah, try it!”

Milady, finding her thoughts betrayed, dug her nails into her flesh to
subdue every emotion that might give to her face any expression except
agony.

Lord de Winter continued: “The officer who commands here in my absence
you have already seen, and therefore know him. He knows how, as you must
have observed, to obey an order--for you did not, I am sure, come from
Portsmouth hither without endeavoring to make him speak. What do you say
of him? Could a statue of marble have been more impassive and more mute?
You have already tried the power of your seductions upon many men, and
unfortunately you have always succeeded; but I give you leave to try
them upon this one. PARDIEU! if you succeed with him, I pronounce you
the demon himself.”

He went toward the door and opened it hastily.

“Call Mr. Felton,” said he. “Wait a minute longer, and I will introduce
him to you.”

There followed between these two personages a strange silence, during
which the sound of a slow and regular step was heard approaching.
Shortly a human form appeared in the shade of the corridor, and the
young lieutenant, with whom we are already acquainted, stopped at the
threshold to receive the orders of the baron.

“Come in, my dear John,” said Lord de Winter, “come in, and shut the
door.”

The young officer entered.

“Now,” said the baron, “look at this woman. She is young; she is
beautiful; she possesses all earthly seductions. Well, she is a monster,
who, at twenty-five years of age, has been guilty of as many crimes as
you could read of in a year in the archives of our tribunals. Her voice
prejudices her hearers in her favor; her beauty serves as a bait to her
victims; her body even pays what she promises--I must do her that
justice. She will try to seduce you, perhaps she will try to kill you. I
have extricated you from misery, Felton; I have caused you to be named
lieutenant; I once saved your life, you know on what occasion. I am for
you not only a protector, but a friend; not only a benefactor, but a
father. This woman has come back again into England for the purpose of
conspiring against my life. I hold this serpent in my hands. Well, I
call you, and say to you: Friend Felton, John, my child, guard me, and
more particularly guard yourself, against this woman. Swear, by your
hopes of salvation, to keep her safely for the chastisement she has
merited. John Felton, I trust your word! John Felton, I put faith in
your loyalty!”

“My Lord,” said the young officer, summoning to his mild countenance all
the hatred he could find in his heart, “my Lord, I swear all shall be
done as you desire.”

Milady received this look like a resigned victim; it was impossible to
imagine a more submissive or a more mild expression than that which
prevailed on her beautiful countenance. Lord de Winter himself could
scarcely recognize the tigress who, a minute before, prepared apparently
for a fight.

“She is not to leave this chamber, understand, John,” continued the
baron. “She is to correspond with nobody; she is to speak to no one but
you--if you will do her the honor to address a word to her.”

“That is sufficient, my Lord! I have sworn.”

“And now, madame, try to make your peace with God, for you are judged by
men!”

Milady let her head sink, as if crushed by this sentence. Lord de Winter
went out, making a sign to Felton, who followed him, shutting the door
after him.

One instant after, the heavy step of a marine who served as sentinel was
heard in the corridor--his ax in his girdle and his musket on his
shoulder.

Milady remained for some minutes in the same position, for she thought
they might perhaps be examining her through the keyhole; she then slowly
raised her head, which had resumed its formidable expression of menace
and defiance, ran to the door to listen, looked out of her window, and
returning to bury herself again in her large armchair, she reflected.




51 OFFICER


Meanwhile, the cardinal looked anxiously for news from England; but no
news arrived that was not annoying and threatening.

Although La Rochelle was invested, however certain success might
appear--thanks to the precautions taken, and above all to the dyke,
which prevented the entrance of any vessel into the besieged city--the
blockade might last a long time yet. This was a great affront to the
king’s army, and a great inconvenience to the cardinal, who had no
longer, it is true, to embroil Louis XIII with Anne of Austria--for that
affair was over--but he had to adjust matters for M. de Bassompierre,
who was embroiled with the Duc d’Angouleme.

As to Monsieur, who had begun the siege, he left to the cardinal the
task of finishing it.

The city, notwithstanding the incredible perseverance of its mayor, had
attempted a sort of mutiny for a surrender; the mayor had hanged the
mutineers. This execution quieted the ill-disposed, who resolved to
allow themselves to die of hunger--this death always appearing to them
more slow and less sure than strangulation.

On their side, from time to time, the besiegers took the messengers
which the Rochellais sent to Buckingham, or the spies which Buckingham
sent to the Rochellais. In one case or the other, the trial was soon
over. The cardinal pronounced the single word, “Hanged!” The king was
invited to come and see the hanging. He came languidly, placing himself
in a good situation to see all the details. This amused him sometimes a
little, and made him endure the siege with patience; but it did not
prevent his getting very tired, or from talking at every moment of
returning to Paris--so that if the messengers and the spies had failed,
his Eminence, notwithstanding all his inventiveness, would have found
himself much embarrassed.

Nevertheless, time passed on, and the Rochellais did not surrender. The
last spy that was taken was the bearer of a letter. This letter told
Buckingham that the city was at an extremity; but instead of adding, “If
your succor does not arrive within fifteen days, we will surrender,” it
added, quite simply, “If your succor comes not within fifteen days, we
shall all be dead with hunger when it comes.”

The Rochellais, then, had no hope but in Buckingham. Buckingham was
their Messiah. It was evident that if they one day learned positively
that they must not count on Buckingham, their courage would fail with
their hope.

The cardinal looked, then, with great impatience for the news from
England which would announce to him that Buckingham would not come.

The question of carrying the city by assault, though often debated in
the council of the king, had been always rejected. In the first place,
La Rochelle appeared impregnable. Then the cardinal, whatever he said,
very well knew that the horror of bloodshed in this encounter, in which
Frenchman would combat against Frenchman, was a retrograde movement of
sixty years impressed upon his policy; and the cardinal was at that
period what we now call a man of progress. In fact, the sack of La
Rochelle, and the assassination of three of four thousand Huguenots who
allowed themselves to be killed, would resemble too closely, in 1628,
the massacre of St. Bartholomew in 1572; and then, above all this, this
extreme measure, which was not at all repugnant to the king, good
Catholic as he was, always fell before this argument of the besieging
generals--La Rochelle is impregnable except to famine.

The cardinal could not drive from his mind the fear he entertained of
his terrible emissary--for he comprehended the strange qualities of this
woman, sometimes a serpent, sometimes a lion. Had she betrayed him? Was
she dead? He knew her well enough in all cases to know that, whether
acting for or against him, as a friend or an enemy, she would not remain
motionless without great impediments; but whence did these impediments
arise? That was what he could not know.

And yet he reckoned, and with reason, on Milady. He had divined in the
past of this woman terrible things which his red mantle alone could
cover; and he felt, from one cause or another, that this woman was his
own, as she could look to no other but himself for a support superior to
the danger which threatened her.

He resolved, then, to carry on the war alone, and to look for no success
foreign to himself, but as we look for a fortunate chance. He continued
to press the raising of the famous dyke which was to starve La Rochelle.
Meanwhile, he cast his eyes over that unfortunate city, which contained
so much deep misery and so many heroic virtues, and recalling the saying
of Louis XI, his political predecessor, as he himself was the
predecessor of Robespierre, he repeated this maxim of Tristan’s gossip:
“Divide in order to reign.”

Henry IV, when besieging Paris, had loaves and provisions thrown over
the walls. The cardinal had little notes thrown over in which he
represented to the Rochellais how unjust, selfish, and barbarous was the
conduct of their leaders. These leaders had corn in abundance, and would
not let them partake of it; they adopted as a maxim--for they, too, had
maxims--that it was of very little consequence that women, children, and
old men should die, so long as the men who were to defend the walls
remained strong and healthy. Up to that time, whether from devotedness
or from want of power to act against it, this maxim, without being
generally adopted, nevertheless passed from theory into practice; but
the notes did it injury. The notes reminded the men that the children,
women, and old men whom they allowed to die were their sons, their
wives, and their fathers, and that it would be more just for everyone to
be reduced to the common misery, in order that equal conditions should
give birth to unanimous resolutions.

These notes had all the effect that he who wrote them could expect, in
that they induced a great number of the inhabitants to open private
negotiations with the royal army.

But at the moment when the cardinal saw his means already bearing fruit,
and applauded himself for having put it in action, an inhabitant of La
Rochelle who had contrived to pass the royal lines--God knows how, such
was the watchfulness of Bassompierre, Schomberg, and the Duc
d’Angouleme, themselves watched over by the cardinal--an inhabitant of
La Rochelle, we say, entered the city, coming from Portsmouth, and
saying that he had seen a magnificent fleet ready to sail within eight
days. Still further, Buckingham announced to the mayor that at length
the great league was about to declare itself against France, and that
the kingdom would be at once invaded by the English, Imperial, and
Spanish armies. This letter was read publicly in all parts of the city.
Copies were put up at the corners of the streets; and even they who had
begun to open negotiations interrupted them, being resolved to await the
succor so pompously announced.

This unexpected circumstance brought back Richelieu’s former anxiety,
and forced him in spite of himself once more to turn his eyes to the
other side of the sea.

During this time, exempt from the anxiety of its only and true chief,
the royal army led a joyous life, neither provisions nor money being
wanting in the camp. All the corps rivaled one another in audacity and
gaiety. To take spies and hang them, to make hazardous expeditions upon
the dyke or the sea, to imagine wild plans, and to execute them
coolly--such were the pastimes which made the army find these days short
which were not only so long to the Rochellais, a prey to famine and
anxiety, but even to the cardinal, who blockaded them so closely.

Sometimes when the cardinal, always on horseback, like the lowest
GENDARME of the army, cast a pensive glance over those works, so slowly
keeping pace with his wishes, which the engineers, brought from all the
corners of France, were executing under his orders, if he met a
Musketeer of the company of Treville, he drew near and looked at him in
a peculiar manner, and not recognizing in him one of our four
companions, he turned his penetrating look and profound thoughts in
another direction.

One day when oppressed with a mortal weariness of mind, without hope in
the negotiations with the city, without news from England, the cardinal
went out, without any other aim than to be out of doors, and accompanied
only by Cahusac and La Houdiniere, strolled along the beach. Mingling
the immensity of his dreams with the immensity of the ocean, he came,
his horse going at a foot’s pace, to a hill from the top of which he
perceived behind a hedge, reclining on the sand and catching in its
passage one of those rays of the sun so rare at this period of the year,
seven men surrounded by empty bottles. Four of these men were our
Musketeers, preparing to listen to a letter one of them had just
received. This letter was so important that it made them forsake their
cards and their dice on the drumhead.

The other three were occupied in opening an enormous flagon of Collicure
wine; these were the lackeys of these gentlemen.

The cardinal was, as we have said, in very low spirits; and nothing when
he was in that state of mind increased his depression so much as gaiety
in others. Besides, he had another strange fancy, which was always to
believe that the causes of his sadness created the gaiety of others.
Making a sign to La Houdiniere and Cahusac to stop, he alighted from his
horse, and went toward these suspected merry companions, hoping, by
means of the sand which deadened the sound of his steps and of the hedge
which concealed his approach, to catch some words of this conversation
which appeared so interesting. At ten paces from the hedge he recognized
the talkative Gascon; and as he had already perceived that these men
were Musketeers, he did not doubt that the three others were those
called the Inseparables; that is to say, Athos, Porthos, and Aramis.

It may be supposed that his desire to hear the conversation was
augmented by this discovery. His eyes took a strange expression, and
with the step of a tiger-cat he advanced toward the hedge; but he had
not been able to catch more than a few vague syllables without any
positive sense, when a sonorous and short cry made him start, and
attracted the attention of the Musketeers.

“Officer!” cried Grimaud.

“You are speaking, you scoundrel!” said Athos, rising upon his elbow,
and transfixing Grimaud with his flaming look.

Grimaud therefore added nothing to his speech, but contented himself
with pointing his index finger in the direction of the hedge, announcing
by this gesture the cardinal and his escort.

With a single bound the Musketeers were on their feet, and saluted with
respect.

The cardinal seemed furious.

“It appears that Messieurs the Musketeers keep guard,” said he. “Are the
English expected by land, or do the Musketeers consider themselves
superior officers?”

“Monseigneur,” replied Athos, for amid the general fright he alone had
preserved the noble calmness and coolness that never forsook him,
“Monseigneur, the Musketeers, when they are not on duty, or when their
duty is over, drink and play at dice, and they are certainly superior
officers to their lackeys.”

“Lackeys?” grumbled the cardinal. “Lackeys who have the order to warn
their masters when anyone passes are not lackeys, they are sentinels.”

“Your Eminence may perceive that if we had not taken this precaution, we
should have been exposed to allowing you to pass without presenting you
our respects or offering you our thanks for the favor you have done us
in uniting us. D’Artagnan,” continued Athos, “you, who but lately were
so anxious for such an opportunity for expressing your gratitude to
Monseigneur, here it is; avail yourself of it.”

These words were pronounced with that imperturbable phlegm which
distinguished Athos in the hour of danger, and with that excessive
politeness which made of him at certain moments a king more majestic
than kings by birth.

D’Artagnan came forward and stammered out a few words of gratitude which
soon expired under the gloomy looks of the cardinal.

“It does not signify, gentlemen,” continued the cardinal, without
appearing to be in the least swerved from his first intention by the
diversion which Athos had started, “it does not signify, gentlemen. I do
not like to have simple soldiers, because they have the advantage of
serving in a privileged corps, thus to play the great lords; discipline
is the same for them as for everybody else.”

Athos allowed the cardinal to finish his sentence completely, and bowed
in sign of assent. Then he resumed in his turn: “Discipline,
Monseigneur, has, I hope, in no way been forgotten by us. We are not on
duty, and we believed that not being on duty we were at liberty to
dispose of our time as we pleased. If we are so fortunate as to have
some particular duty to perform for your Eminence, we are ready to obey
you. Your Eminence may perceive,” continued Athos, knitting his brow,
for this sort of investigation began to annoy him, “that we have not
come out without our arms.”

And he showed the cardinal, with his finger, the four muskets piled near
the drum, on which were the cards and dice.

“Your Eminence may believe,” added d’Artagnan, “that we would have come
to meet you, if we could have supposed it was Monseigneur coming toward
us with so few attendants.”

The cardinal bit his mustache, and even his lips a little.

“Do you know what you look like, all together, as you are armed and
guarded by your lackeys?” said the cardinal. “You look like four
conspirators.”

“Oh, as to that, Monseigneur, it is true,” said Athos; “we do conspire,
as your Eminence might have seen the other morning. Only we conspire
against the Rochellais.”

“Ah, you gentlemen of policy!” replied the cardinal, knitting his brow
in his turn, “the secret of many unknown things might perhaps be found
in your brains, if we could read them as you read that letter which you
concealed as soon as you saw me coming.”

The color mounted to the face of Athos, and he made a step toward his
Eminence.

“One might think you really suspected us, monseigneur, and we were
undergoing a real interrogatory. If it be so, we trust your Eminence
will deign to explain yourself, and we should then at least be
acquainted with our real position.”

“And if it were an interrogatory!” replied the cardinal. “Others besides
you have undergone such, Monsieur Athos, and have replied thereto.”

“Thus I have told your Eminence that you had but to question us, and we
are ready to reply.”

“What was that letter you were about to read, Monsieur Aramis, and which
you so promptly concealed?”

“A woman’s letter, monseigneur.”

“Ah, yes, I see,” said the cardinal; “we must be discreet with this sort
of letters; but nevertheless, we may show them to a confessor, and you
know I have taken orders.”

“Monseigneur,” said Athos, with a calmness the more terrible because he
risked his head in making this reply, “the letter is a woman’s letter,
but it is neither signed Marion de Lorme, nor Madame d’Aiguillon.”

The cardinal became as pale as death; lightning darted from his eyes. He
turned round as if to give an order to Cahusac and Houdiniere. Athos saw
the movement; he made a step toward the muskets, upon which the other
three friends had fixed their eyes, like men ill-disposed to allow
themselves to be taken. The cardinalists were three; the Musketeers,
lackeys included, were seven. He judged that the match would be so much
the less equal, if Athos and his companions were really plotting; and by
one of those rapid turns which he always had at command, all his anger
faded away into a smile.

“Well, well!” said he, “you are brave young men, proud in daylight,
faithful in darkness. We can find no fault with you for watching over
yourselves, when you watch so carefully over others. Gentlemen, I have
not forgotten the night in which you served me as an escort to the Red
Dovecot. If there were any danger to be apprehended on the road I am
going, I would request you to accompany me; but as there is none, remain
where you are, finish your bottles, your game, and your letter. Adieu,
gentlemen!”

And remounting his horse, which Cahusac led to him, he saluted them with
his hand, and rode away.

The four young men, standing and motionless, followed him with their
eyes without speaking a single word until he had disappeared. Then they
looked at one another.

The countenances of all gave evidence of terror, for notwithstanding the
friendly adieu of his Eminence, they plainly perceived that the cardinal
went away with rage in his heart.

Athos alone smiled, with a self-possessed, disdainful smile.

When the cardinal was out of hearing and sight, “That Grimaud kept bad
watch!” cried Porthos, who had a great inclination to vent his ill-humor
on somebody.

Grimaud was about to reply to excuse himself. Athos lifted his finger,
and Grimaud was silent.

“Would you have given up the letter, Aramis?” said d’Artagnan.

“I,” said Aramis, in his most flutelike tone, “I had made up my mind. If
he had insisted upon the letter being given up to him, I would have
presented the letter to him with one hand, and with the other I would
have run my sword through his body.”

“I expected as much,” said Athos; “and that was why I threw myself
between you and him. Indeed, this man is very much to blame for talking
thus to other men; one would say he had never had to do with any but
women and children.”

“My dear Athos, I admire you, but nevertheless we were in the wrong,
after all.”

“How, in the wrong?” said Athos. “Whose, then, is the air we breathe?
Whose is the ocean upon which we look? Whose is the sand upon which we
were reclining? Whose is that letter of your mistress? Do these belong
to the cardinal? Upon my honor, this man fancies the world belongs to
him. There you stood, stammering, stupefied, annihilated. One might have
supposed the Bastille appeared before you, and that the gigantic Medusa
had converted you into stone. Is being in love conspiring? You are in
love with a woman whom the cardinal has caused to be shut up, and you
wish to get her out of the hands of the cardinal. That’s a match you are
playing with his Eminence; this letter is your game. Why should you
expose your game to your adversary? That is never done. Let him find it
out if he can! We can find out his!”

“Well, that’s all very sensible, Athos,” said d’Artagnan.

“In that case, let there be no more question of what’s past, and let
Aramis resume the letter from his cousin where the cardinal interrupted
him.”

Aramis drew the letter from his pocket; the three friends surrounded
him, and the three lackeys grouped themselves again near the wine jar.

“You had only read a line or two,” said d’Artagnan; “read the letter
again from the commencement.”

“Willingly,” said Aramis.

“My dear Cousin,

“I think I shall make up my mind to set out for Bethune, where my sister
has placed our little servant in the convent of the Carmelites; this
poor child is quite resigned, as she knows she cannot live elsewhere
without the salvation of her soul being in danger. Nevertheless, if the
affairs of our family are arranged, as we hope they will be, I believe
she will run the risk of being damned, and will return to those she
regrets, particularly as she knows they are always thinking of her.
Meanwhile, she is not very wretched; what she most desires is a letter
from her intended. I know that such viands pass with difficulty through
convent gratings; but after all, as I have given you proofs, my dear
cousin, I am not unskilled in such affairs, and I will take charge of
the commission. My sister thanks you for your good and eternal
remembrance. She has experienced much anxiety; but she is now at length
a little reassured, having sent her secretary away in order that nothing
may happen unexpectedly.

“Adieu, my dear cousin. Tell us news of yourself as often as you can;
that is to say, as often as you can with safety. I embrace you.

“MARIE MICHON”

“Oh, what do I not owe you, Aramis?” said d’Artagnan. “Dear Constance! I
have at length, then, intelligence of you. She lives; she is in safety
in a convent; she is at Bethune! Where is Bethune, Athos?”

“Why, upon the frontiers of Artois and of Flanders. The siege once over,
we shall be able to make a tour in that direction.”

“And that will not be long, it is to be hoped,” said Porthos; “for they
have this morning hanged a spy who confessed that the Rochellais were
reduced to the leather of their shoes. Supposing that after having eaten
the leather they eat the soles, I cannot see much that is left unless
they eat one another.”

“Poor fools!” said Athos, emptying a glass of excellent Bordeaux wine
which, without having at that period the reputation it now enjoys,
merited it no less, “poor fools! As if the Catholic religion was not the
most advantageous and the most agreeable of all religions! All the
same,” resumed he, after having clicked his tongue against his palate,
“they are brave fellows! But what the devil are you about, Aramis?”
continued Athos. “Why, you are squeezing that letter into your pocket!”

“Yes,” said d’Artagnan, “Athos is right, it must be burned. And yet if
we burn it, who knows whether Monsieur Cardinal has not a secret to
interrogate ashes?”

“He must have one,” said Athos.

“What will you do with the letter, then?” asked Porthos.

“Come here, Grimaud,” said Athos. Grimaud rose and obeyed. “As a
punishment for having spoken without permission, my friend, you will
please to eat this piece of paper; then to recompense you for the
service you will have rendered us, you shall afterward drink this glass
of wine. First, here is the letter. Eat heartily.”

Grimaud smiled; and with his eyes fixed upon the glass which Athos held
in his hand, he ground the paper well between his teeth and then
swallowed it.

“Bravo, Monsieur Grimaud!” said Athos; “and now take this. That’s well.
We dispense with your saying grace.”

Grimaud silently swallowed the glass of Bordeaux wine; but his eyes,
raised toward heaven during this delicious occupation, spoke a language
which, though mute, was not the less expressive.

“And now,” said Athos, “unless Monsieur Cardinal should form the
ingenious idea of ripping up Grimaud, I think we may be pretty much at
our ease respecting the letter.”

Meantime, his Eminence continued his melancholy ride, murmuring between
his mustaches, “These four men must positively be mine.”




52 CAPTIVITY: THE FIRST DAY


Let us return to Milady, whom a glance thrown upon the coast of France
has made us lose sight of for an instant.

We shall find her still in the despairing attitude in which we left her,
plunged in an abyss of dismal reflection--a dark hell at the gate of
which she has almost left hope behind, because for the first time she
doubts, for the first time she fears.

On two occasions her fortune has failed her, on two occasions she has
found herself discovered and betrayed; and on these two occasions it was
to one fatal genius, sent doubtlessly by the Lord to combat her, that
she has succumbed. D’Artagnan has conquered her--her, that invincible
power of evil.

He has deceived her in her love, humbled her in her pride, thwarted her
in her ambition; and now he ruins her fortune, deprives her of liberty,
and even threatens her life. Still more, he has lifted the corner of her
mask--that shield with which she covered herself and which rendered her
so strong.

D’Artagnan has turned aside from Buckingham, whom she hates as she hates
everyone she has loved, the tempest with which Richelieu threatened him
in the person of the queen. D’Artagnan had passed himself upon her as de
Wardes, for whom she had conceived one of those tigerlike fancies common
to women of her character. D’Artagnan knows that terrible secret which
she has sworn no one shall know without dying. In short, at the moment
in which she has just obtained from Richelieu a carte blanche by the
means of which she is about to take vengeance on her enemy, this
precious paper is torn from her hands, and it is d’Artagnan who holds
her prisoner and is about to send her to some filthy Botany Bay, some
infamous Tyburn of the Indian Ocean.

All this she owes to d’Artagnan, without doubt. From whom can come so
many disgraces heaped upon her head, if not from him? He alone could
have transmitted to Lord de Winter all these frightful secrets which he
has discovered, one after another, by a train of fatalities. He knows
her brother-in-law. He must have written to him.

What hatred she distills! Motionless, with her burning and fixed
glances, in her solitary apartment, how well the outbursts of passion
which at times escape from the depths of her chest with her respiration,
accompany the sound of the surf which rises, growls, roars, and breaks
itself like an eternal and powerless despair against the rocks on which
is built this dark and lofty castle! How many magnificent projects of
vengeance she conceives by the light of the flashes which her
tempestuous passion casts over her mind against Mme. Bonacieux, against
Buckingham, but above all against d’Artagnan--projects lost in the
distance of the future.

Yes; but in order to avenge herself she must be free. And to be free, a
prisoner has to pierce a wall, detach bars, cut through a floor--all
undertakings which a patient and strong man may accomplish, but before
which the feverish irritations of a woman must give way. Besides, to do
all this, time is necessary--months, years; and she has ten or twelve
days, as Lord de Winter, her fraternal and terrible jailer, has told
her.

And yet, if she were a man she would attempt all this, and perhaps might
succeed; why, then, did heaven make the mistake of placing that manlike
soul in that frail and delicate body?

The first moments of her captivity were terrible; a few convulsions of
rage which she could not suppress paid her debt of feminine weakness to
nature. But by degrees she overcame the outbursts of her mad passion;
and nervous tremblings which agitated her frame disappeared, and she
remained folded within herself like a fatigued serpent in repose.

“Go to, go to! I must have been mad to allow myself to be carried away
so,” says she, gazing into the glass, which reflects back to her eyes
the burning glance by which she appears to interrogate herself. “No
violence; violence is the proof of weakness. In the first place, I have
never succeeded by that means. Perhaps if I employed my strength against
women I might perchance find them weaker than myself, and consequently
conquer them; but it is with men that I struggle, and I am but a woman
to them. Let me fight like a woman, then; my strength is in my
weakness.”

Then, as if to render an account to herself of the changes she could
place upon her countenance, so mobile and so expressive, she made it
take all expressions from that of passionate anger, which convulsed her
features, to that of the most sweet, most affectionate, and most
seducing smile. Then her hair assumed successively, under her skillful
hands, all the undulations she thought might assist the charms of her
face. At length she murmured, satisfied with herself, “Come, nothing is
lost; I am still beautiful.”

It was then nearly eight o’clock in the evening. Milady perceived a bed;
she calculated that the repose of a few hours would not only refresh her
head and her ideas, but still further, her complexion. A better idea,
however, came into her mind before going to bed. She had heard something
said about supper. She had already been an hour in this apartment; they
could not long delay bringing her a repast. The prisoner did not wish to
lose time; and she resolved to make that very evening some attempts to
ascertain the nature of the ground she had to work upon, by studying the
characters of the men to whose guardianship she was committed.

A light appeared under the door; this light announced the reappearance
of her jailers. Milady, who had arisen, threw herself quickly into the
armchair, her head thrown back, her beautiful hair unbound and
disheveled, her bosom half bare beneath her crumpled lace, one hand on
her heart, and the other hanging down.

The bolts were drawn; the door groaned upon its hinges. Steps sounded in
the chamber, and drew near.

“Place that table there,” said a voice which the prisoner recognized as
that of Felton.

The order was executed.

“You will bring lights, and relieve the sentinel,” continued Felton.

And this double order which the young lieutenant gave to the same
individuals proved to Milady that her servants were the same men as her
guards; that is to say, soldiers.

Felton’s orders were, for the rest, executed with a silent rapidity that
gave a good idea of the way in which he maintained discipline.

At length Felton, who had not yet looked at Milady, turned toward her.

“Ah, ah!” said he, “she is asleep; that’s well. When she wakes she can
sup.” And he made some steps toward the door.

“But, my lieutenant,” said a soldier, less stoical than his chief, and
who had approached Milady, “this woman is not asleep.”

“What, not asleep!” said Felton; “what is she doing, then?”

“She has fainted. Her face is very pale, and I have listened in vain; I
do not hear her breathe.”

“You are right,” said Felton, after having looked at Milady from the
spot on which he stood without moving a step toward her. “Go and tell
Lord de Winter that his prisoner has fainted--for this event not having
been foreseen, I don’t know what to do.”

The soldier went out to obey the orders of his officer. Felton sat down
upon an armchair which happened to be near the door, and waited without
speaking a word, without making a gesture. Milady possessed that great
art, so much studied by women, of looking through her long eyelashes
without appearing to open the lids. She perceived Felton, who sat with
his back toward her. She continued to look at him for nearly ten
minutes, and in these ten minutes the immovable guardian never turned
round once.

She then thought that Lord de Winter would come, and by his presence
give fresh strength to her jailer. Her first trial was lost; she acted
like a woman who reckons up her resources. As a result she raised her
head, opened her eyes, and sighed deeply.

At this sigh Felton turned round.

“Ah, you are awake, madame,” he said; “then I have nothing more to do
here. If you want anything you can ring.”

“Oh, my God, my God! how I have suffered!” said Milady, in that
harmonious voice which, like that of the ancient enchantresses, charmed
all whom she wished to destroy.

And she assumed, upon sitting up in the armchair, a still more graceful
and abandoned position than when she reclined.

Felton arose.

“You will be served, thus, madame, three times a day,” said he. “In the
morning at nine o’clock, in the day at one o’clock, and in the evening
at eight. If that does not suit you, you can point out what other hours
you prefer, and in this respect your wishes will be complied with.”

“But am I to remain always alone in this vast and dismal chamber?” asked
Milady.

“A woman of the neighbourhood has been sent for, who will be tomorrow at
the castle, and will return as often as you desire her presence.”

“I thank you, sir,” replied the prisoner, humbly.

Felton made a slight bow, and directed his steps toward the door. At the
moment he was about to go out, Lord de Winter appeared in the corridor,
followed by the soldier who had been sent to inform him of the swoon of
Milady. He held a vial of salts in his hand.

“Well, what is it--what is going on here?” said he, in a jeering voice,
on seeing the prisoner sitting up and Felton about to go out. “Is this
corpse come to life already? Felton, my lad, did you not perceive that
you were taken for a novice, and that the first act was being performed
of a comedy of which we shall doubtless have the pleasure of following
out all the developments?”

“I thought so, my lord,” said Felton; “but as the prisoner is a woman,
after all, I wish to pay her the attention that every man of gentle
birth owes to a woman, if not on her account, at least on my own.”

Milady shuddered through her whole system. These words of Felton’s
passed like ice through her veins.

“So,” replied de Winter, laughing, “that beautiful hair so skillfully
disheveled, that white skin, and that languishing look, have not yet
seduced you, you heart of stone?”

“No, my Lord,” replied the impassive young man; “your Lordship may be
assured that it requires more than the tricks and coquetry of a woman to
corrupt me.”

“In that case, my brave lieutenant, let us leave Milady to find out
something else, and go to supper; but be easy! She has a fruitful
imagination, and the second act of the comedy will not delay its steps
after the first.”

And at these words Lord de Winter passed his arm through that of Felton,
and led him out, laughing.

“Oh, I will be a match for you!” murmured Milady, between her teeth; “be
assured of that, you poor spoiled monk, you poor converted soldier, who
has cut his uniform out of a monk’s frock!”

“By the way,” resumed de Winter, stopping at the threshold of the door,
“you must not, Milady, let this check take away your appetite. Taste
that fowl and those fish. On my honor, they are not poisoned. I have a
very good cook, and he is not to be my heir; I have full and perfect
confidence in him. Do as I do. Adieu, dear sister, till your next
swoon!”

This was all that Milady could endure. Her hands clutched her armchair;
she ground her teeth inwardly; her eyes followed the motion of the door
as it closed behind Lord de Winter and Felton, and the moment she was
alone a fresh fit of despair seized her. She cast her eyes upon the
table, saw the glittering of a knife, rushed toward it and clutched it;
but her disappointment was cruel. The blade was round, and of flexible
silver.

A burst of laughter resounded from the other side of the ill-closed
door, and the door reopened.

“Ha, ha!” cried Lord de Winter; “ha, ha! Don’t you see, my brave Felton;
don’t you see what I told you? That knife was for you, my lad; she would
have killed you. Observe, this is one of her peculiarities, to get rid
thus, after one fashion or another, of all the people who bother her. If
I had listened to you, the knife would have been pointed and of steel.
Then no more of Felton; she would have cut your throat, and after that
everybody else’s. See, John, see how well she knows how to handle a
knife.”

In fact, Milady still held the harmless weapon in her clenched hand; but
these last words, this supreme insult, relaxed her hands, her strength,
and even her will. The knife fell to the ground.

“You were right, my Lord,” said Felton, with a tone of profound disgust
which sounded to the very bottom of the heart of Milady, “you were
right, my Lord, and I was wrong.”

And both again left the room.

But this time Milady lent a more attentive ear than the first, and she
heard their steps die away in the distance of the corridor.

“I am lost,” murmured she; “I am lost! I am in the power of men upon
whom I can have no more influence than upon statues of bronze or
granite; they know me by heart, and are steeled against all my weapons.
It is, however, impossible that this should end as they have decreed!”

In fact, as this last reflection indicated--this instinctive return to
hope--sentiments of weakness or fear did not dwell long in her ardent
spirit. Milady sat down to table, ate from several dishes, drank a
little Spanish wine, and felt all her resolution return.

Before she went to bed she had pondered, analyzed, turned on all sides,
examined on all points, the words, the steps, the gestures, the signs,
and even the silence of her interlocutors; and of this profound,
skillful, and anxious study the result was that Felton, everything
considered, appeared the more vulnerable of her two persecutors.

One expression above all recurred to the mind of the prisoner: “If I had
listened to you,” Lord de Winter had said to Felton.

Felton, then, had spoken in her favor, since Lord de Winter had not been
willing to listen to him.

“Weak or strong,” repeated Milady, “that man has, then, a spark of pity
in his soul; of that spark I will make a flame that shall devour him. As
to the other, he knows me, he fears me, and knows what he has to expect
of me if ever I escape from his hands. It is useless, then, to attempt
anything with him. But Felton--that’s another thing. He is a young,
ingenuous, pure man who seems virtuous; him there are means of
destroying.”

And Milady went to bed and fell asleep with a smile upon her lips.
Anyone who had seen her sleeping might have said she was a young girl
dreaming of the crown of flowers she was to wear on her brow at the next
festival.




53 CAPTIVITY: THE SECOND DAY


Milady dreamed that she at length had d’Artagnan in her power, that she
was present at his execution; and it was the sight of his odious blood,
flowing beneath the ax of the headsman, which spread that charming smile
upon her lips.

She slept as a prisoner sleeps, rocked by his first hope.

In the morning, when they entered her chamber she was still in bed.
Felton remained in the corridor. He brought with him the woman of whom
he had spoken the evening before, and who had just arrived; this woman
entered, and approaching Milady’s bed, offered her services.

Milady was habitually pale; her complexion might therefore deceive a
person who saw her for the first time.

“I am in a fever,” said she; “I have not slept a single instant during
all this long night. I suffer horribly. Are you likely to be more humane
to me than others were yesterday? All I ask is permission to remain
abed.”

“Would you like to have a physician called?” said the woman.

Felton listened to this dialogue without speaking a word.

Milady reflected that the more people she had around her the more she
would have to work upon, and Lord de Winter would redouble his watch.
Besides, the physician might declare the ailment feigned; and Milady,
after having lost the first trick, was not willing to lose the second.

“Go and fetch a physician?” said she. “What could be the good of that?
These gentlemen declared yesterday that my illness was a comedy; it
would be just the same today, no doubt--for since yesterday evening they
have had plenty of time to send for a doctor.”

“Then,” said Felton, who became impatient, “say yourself, madame, what
treatment you wish followed.”

“Eh, how can I tell? My God! I know that I suffer, that’s all. Give me
anything you like, it is of little consequence.”

“Go and fetch Lord de Winter,” said Felton, tired of these eternal
complaints.

“Oh, no, no!” cried Milady; “no, sir, do not call him, I conjure you. I
am well, I want nothing; do not call him.”

She gave so much vehemence, such magnetic eloquence to this exclamation,
that Felton in spite of himself advanced some steps into the room.

“He has come!” thought Milady.

“Meanwhile, madame, if you really suffer,” said Felton, “a physician
shall be sent for; and if you deceive us--well, it will be the worse for
you. But at least we shall not have to reproach ourselves with
anything.”

Milady made no reply, but turning her beautiful head round upon her
pillow, she burst into tears, and uttered heartbreaking sobs.

Felton surveyed her for an instant with his usual impassiveness; then,
seeing that the crisis threatened to be prolonged, he went out. The
woman followed him, and Lord de Winter did not appear.

“I fancy I begin to see my way,” murmured Milady, with a savage joy,
burying herself under the clothes to conceal from anybody who might be
watching her this burst of inward satisfaction.

Two hours passed away.

“Now it is time that the malady should be over,” said she; “let me rise,
and obtain some success this very day. I have but ten days, and this
evening two of them will be gone.”

In the morning, when they entered Milady’s chamber they had brought her
breakfast. Now, she thought, they could not long delay coming to clear
the table, and that Felton would then reappear.

Milady was not deceived. Felton reappeared, and without observing
whether Milady had or had not touched her repast, made a sign that the
table should be carried out of the room, it having been brought in ready
spread.

Felton remained behind; he held a book in his hand.

Milady, reclining in an armchair near the chimney, beautiful, pale, and
resigned, looked like a holy virgin awaiting martyrdom.

Felton approached her, and said, “Lord de Winter, who is a Catholic,
like yourself, madame, thinking that the deprivation of the rites and
ceremonies of your church might be painful to you, has consented that
you should read every day the ordinary of your Mass; and here is a book
which contains the ritual.”

At the manner in which Felton laid the book upon the little table near
which Milady was sitting, at the tone in which he pronounced the two
words, YOUR MASS, at the disdainful smile with which he accompanied
them, Milady raised her head, and looked more attentively at the
officer.

By that plain arrangement of the hair, by that costume of extreme
simplicity, by the brow polished like marble and as hard and
impenetrable, she recognized one of those gloomy Puritans she had so
often met, not only in the court of King James, but in that of the King
of France, where, in spite of the remembrance of the St. Bartholomew,
they sometimes came to seek refuge.

She then had one of those sudden inspirations which only people of
genius receive in great crises, in supreme moments which are to decide
their fortunes or their lives.

Those two words, YOUR MASS, and a simple glance cast upon Felton,
revealed to her all the importance of the reply she was about to make;
but with that rapidity of intelligence which was peculiar to her, this
reply, ready arranged, presented itself to her lips:

“I?” said she, with an accent of disdain in unison with that which she
had remarked in the voice of the young officer, “I, sir? MY MASS? Lord
de Winter, the corrupted Catholic, knows very well that I am not of his
religion, and this is a snare he wishes to lay for me!”

“And of what religion are you, then, madame?” asked Felton, with an
astonishment which in spite of the empire he held over himself he could
not entirely conceal.

“I will tell it,” cried Milady, with a feigned exultation, “on the day
when I shall have suffered sufficiently for my faith.”

The look of Felton revealed to Milady the full extent of the space she
had opened for herself by this single word.

The young officer, however, remained mute and motionless; his look alone
had spoken.

“I am in the hands of my enemies,” continued she, with that tone of
enthusiasm which she knew was familiar to the Puritans. “Well, let my
God save me, or let me perish for my God! That is the reply I beg you to
make to Lord de Winter. And as to this book,” added she, pointing to the
manual with her finger but without touching it, as if she must be
contaminated by it, “you may carry it back and make use of it yourself,
for doubtless you are doubly the accomplice of Lord de Winter--the
accomplice in his persecutions, the accomplice in his heresies.”

Felton made no reply, took the book with the same appearance of
repugnance which he had before manifested, and retired pensively.

Lord de Winter came toward five o’clock in the evening. Milady had had
time, during the whole day, to trace her plan of conduct. She received
him like a woman who had already recovered all her advantages.

“It appears,” said the baron, seating himself in the armchair opposite
that occupied by Milady, and stretching out his legs carelessly upon the
hearth, “it appears we have made a little apostasy!”

“What do you mean, sir!”

“I mean to say that since we last met you have changed your religion.
You have not by chance married a Protestant for a third husband, have
you?”

“Explain yourself, my Lord,” replied the prisoner, with majesty; “for
though I hear your words, I declare I do not understand them.”

“Then you have no religion at all; I like that best,” replied Lord de
Winter, laughing.

“Certainly that is most in accord with your own principles,” replied
Milady, frigidly.

“Oh, I confess it is all the same to me.”

“Oh, you need not avow this religious indifference, my Lord; your
debaucheries and crimes would vouch for it.”

“What, you talk of debaucheries, Madame Messalina, Lady Macbeth! Either
I misunderstand you or you are very shameless!”

“You only speak thus because you are overheard,” coolly replied Milady;
“and you wish to interest your jailers and your hangmen against me.”

“My jailers and my hangmen! Heyday, madame! you are taking a poetical
tone, and the comedy of yesterday turns to a tragedy this evening. As to
the rest, in eight days you will be where you ought to be, and my task
will be completed.”

“Infamous task! impious task!” cried Milady, with the exultation of a
victim who provokes his judge.

“My word,” said de Winter, rising, “I think the hussy is going mad!
Come, come, calm yourself, Madame Puritan, or I’ll remove you to a
dungeon. It’s my Spanish wine that has got into your head, is it not?
But never mind; that sort of intoxication is not dangerous, and will
have no bad effects.”

And Lord de Winter retired swearing, which at that period was a very
knightly habit.

Felton was indeed behind the door, and had not lost one word of this
scene. Milady had guessed aright.

“Yes, go, go!” said she to her brother; “the effects ARE drawing near,
on the contrary; but you, weak fool, will not see them until it is too
late to shun them.”

Silence was re-established. Two hours passed away. Milady’s supper was
brought in, and she was found deeply engaged in saying her prayers
aloud--prayers which she had learned of an old servant of her second
husband, a most austere Puritan. She appeared to be in ecstasy, and did
not pay the least attention to what was going on around her. Felton made
a sign that she should not be disturbed; and when all was arranged, he
went out quietly with the soldiers.

Milady knew she might be watched, so she continued her prayers to the
end; and it appeared to her that the soldier who was on duty at her door
did not march with the same step, and seemed to listen. For the moment
she wished nothing better. She arose, came to the table, ate but little,
and drank only water.

An hour after, her table was cleared; but Milady remarked that this time
Felton did not accompany the soldiers. He feared, then, to see her too
often.

She turned toward the wall to smile--for there was in this smile such an
expression of triumph that this smile alone would have betrayed her.

She allowed, therefore, half an hour to pass away; and as at that moment
all was silence in the old castle, as nothing was heard but the eternal
murmur of the waves--that immense breaking of the ocean--with her pure,
harmonious, and powerful voice, she began the first couplet of the psalm
then in great favor with the Puritans:

“Thou leavest thy servants, Lord, To see if they be strong; But soon
thou dost afford Thy hand to lead them on.”

These verses were not excellent--very far from it; but as it is well
known, the Puritans did not pique themselves upon their poetry.

While singing, Milady listened. The soldier on guard at her door
stopped, as if he had been changed into stone. Milady was then able to
judge of the effect she had produced.

Then she continued her singing with inexpressible fervor and feeling. It
appeared to her that the sounds spread to a distance beneath the vaulted
roofs, and carried with them a magic charm to soften the hearts of her
jailers. It however likewise appeared that the soldier on duty--a
zealous Catholic, no doubt--shook off the charm, for through the door he
called: “Hold your tongue, madame! Your song is as dismal as a ‘De
profundis’; and if besides the pleasure of being in garrison here, we
must hear such things as these, no mortal can hold out.”

“Silence!” then exclaimed another stern voice which Milady recognized as
that of Felton. “What are you meddling with, stupid? Did anybody order
you to prevent that woman from singing? No. You were told to guard
her--to fire at her if she attempted to fly. Guard her! If she flies,
kill her; but don’t exceed your orders.”

An expression of unspeakable joy lightened the countenance of Milady;
but this expression was fleeting as the reflection of lightning. Without
appearing to have heard the dialogue, of which she had not lost a word,
she began again, giving to her voice all the charm, all the power, all
the seduction the demon had bestowed upon it:

“For all my tears, my cares, My exile, and my chains, I have my youth,
my prayers, And God, who counts my pains.”

Her voice, of immense power and sublime expression, gave to the rude,
unpolished poetry of these psalms a magic and an effect which the most
exalted Puritans rarely found in the songs of their brethren, and which
they were forced to ornament with all the resources of their
imagination. Felton believed he heard the singing of the angel who
consoled the three Hebrews in the furnace.

Milady continued:

“One day our doors will ope, With God come our desire; And if betrays
that hope, To death we can aspire.”

This verse, into which the terrible enchantress threw her whole soul,
completed the trouble which had seized the heart of the young officer.
He opened the door quickly; and Milady saw him appear, pale as usual,
but with his eye inflamed and almost wild.

“Why do you sing thus, and with such a voice?” said he.

“Your pardon, sir,” said Milady, with mildness. “I forgot that my songs
are out of place in this castle. I have perhaps offended you in your
creed; but it was without wishing to do so, I swear. Pardon me, then, a
fault which is perhaps great, but which certainly was involuntary.”

Milady was so beautiful at this moment, the religious ecstasy in which
she appeared to be plunged gave such an expression to her countenance,
that Felton was so dazzled that he fancied he beheld the angel whom he
had only just before heard.

“Yes, yes,” said he; “you disturb, you agitate the people who live in
the castle.”

The poor, senseless young man was not aware of the incoherence of his
words, while Milady was reading with her lynx’s eyes the very depths of
his heart.

“I will be silent, then,” said Milady, casting down her eyes with all
the sweetness she could give to her voice, with all the resignation she
could impress upon her manner.

“No, no, madame,” said Felton, “only do not sing so loud, particularly
at night.”

And at these words Felton, feeling that he could not long maintain his
severity toward his prisoner, rushed out of the room.

“You have done right, Lieutenant,” said the soldier. “Such songs disturb
the mind; and yet we become accustomed to them, her voice is so
beautiful.”




54 CAPTIVITY: THE THIRD DAY


Felton had fallen; but there was still another step to be taken. He must
be retained, or rather he must be left quite alone; and Milady but
obscurely perceived the means which could lead to this result.

Still more must be done. He must be made to speak, in order that he
might be spoken to--for Milady very well knew that her greatest
seduction was in her voice, which so skillfully ran over the whole gamut
of tones from human speech to language celestial.

Yet in spite of all this seduction Milady might fail--for Felton was
forewarned, and that against the least chance. From that moment she
watched all his actions, all his words, from the simplest glance of his
eyes to his gestures--even to a breath that could be interpreted as a
sigh. In short, she studied everything, as a skillful comedian does to
whom a new part has been assigned in a line to which he is not
accustomed.

Face to face with Lord de Winter her plan of conduct was more easy. She
had laid that down the preceding evening. To remain silent and dignified
in his presence; from time to time to irritate him by affected disdain,
by a contemptuous word; to provoke him to threats and violence which
would produce a contrast with her own resignation--such was her plan.
Felton would see all; perhaps he would say nothing, but he would see.

In the morning, Felton came as usual; but Milady allowed him to preside
over all the preparations for breakfast without addressing a word to
him. At the moment when he was about to retire, she was cheered with a
ray of hope, for she thought he was about to speak; but his lips moved
without any sound leaving his mouth, and making a powerful effort to
control himself, he sent back to his heart the words that were about to
escape from his lips, and went out. Toward midday, Lord de Winter
entered.

It was a tolerably fine winter’s day, and a ray of that pale English sun
which lights but does not warm came through the bars of her prison.

Milady was looking out at the window, and pretended not to hear the door
as it opened.

“Ah, ah!” said Lord de Winter, “after having played comedy, after having
played tragedy, we are now playing melancholy?”

The prisoner made no reply.

“Yes, yes,” continued Lord de Winter, “I understand. You would like very
well to be at liberty on that beach! You would like very well to be in a
good ship dancing upon the waves of that emerald-green sea; you would
like very well, either on land or on the ocean, to lay for me one of
those nice little ambuscades you are so skillful in planning. Patience,
patience! In four days’ time the shore will be beneath your feet, the
sea will be open to you--more open than will perhaps be agreeable to
you, for in four days England will be relieved of you.”

Milady folded her hands, and raising her fine eyes toward heaven, “Lord,
Lord,” said she, with an angelic meekness of gesture and tone, “pardon
this man, as I myself pardon him.”

“Yes, pray, accursed woman!” cried the baron; “your prayer is so much
the more generous from your being, I swear to you, in the power of a man
who will never pardon you!” and he went out.

At the moment he went out a piercing glance darted through the opening
of the nearly closed door, and she perceived Felton, who drew quickly to
one side to prevent being seen by her.

Then she threw herself upon her knees, and began to pray.

“My God, my God!” said she, “thou knowest in what holy cause I suffer;
give me, then, strength to suffer.”

The door opened gently; the beautiful supplicant pretended not to hear
the noise, and in a voice broken by tears, she continued:

“God of vengeance! God of goodness! wilt thou allow the frightful
projects of this man to be accomplished?”

Then only she pretended to hear the sound of Felton’s steps, and rising
quick as thought, she blushed, as if ashamed of being surprised on her
knees.

“I do not like to disturb those who pray, madame,” said Felton,
seriously; “do not disturb yourself on my account, I beseech you.”

“How do you know I was praying, sir?” said Milady, in a voice broken by
sobs. “You were deceived, sir; I was not praying.”

“Do you think, then, madame,” replied Felton, in the same serious voice,
but with a milder tone, “do you think I assume the right of preventing a
creature from prostrating herself before her Creator? God forbid!
Besides, repentance becomes the guilty; whatever crimes they may have
committed, for me the guilty are sacred at the feet of God!”

“Guilty? I?” said Milady, with a smile which might have disarmed the
angel of the last judgment. “Guilty? Oh, my God, thou knowest whether I
am guilty! Say I am condemned, sir, if you please; but you know that
God, who loves martyrs, sometimes permits the innocent to be condemned.”

“Were you condemned, were you innocent, were you a martyr,” replied
Felton, “the greater would be the necessity for prayer; and I myself
would aid you with my prayers.”

“Oh, you are a just man!” cried Milady, throwing herself at his feet. “I
can hold out no longer, for I fear I shall be wanting in strength at the
moment when I shall be forced to undergo the struggle, and confess my
faith. Listen, then, to the supplication of a despairing woman. You are
abused, sir; but that is not the question. I only ask you one favor; and
if you grant it me, I will bless you in this world and in the next.”

“Speak to the master, madame,” said Felton; “happily I am neither
charged with the power of pardoning nor punishing. It is upon one higher
placed than I am that God has laid this responsibility.”

“To you--no, to you alone! Listen to me, rather than add to my
destruction, rather than add to my ignominy!”

“If you have merited this shame, madame, if you have incurred this
ignominy, you must submit to it as an offering to God.”

“What do you say? Oh, you do not understand me! When I speak of
ignominy, you think I speak of some chastisement, of imprisonment or
death. Would to heaven! Of what consequence to me is imprisonment or
death?”

“It is I who no longer understand you, madame,” said Felton.

“Or, rather, who pretend not to understand me, sir!” replied the
prisoner, with a smile of incredulity.

“No, madame, on the honor of a soldier, on the faith of a Christian.”

“What, you are ignorant of Lord de Winter’s designs upon me?”

“I am.”

“Impossible; you are his confidant!”

“I never lie, madame.”

“Oh, he conceals them too little for you not to divine them.”

“I seek to divine nothing, madame; I wait till I am confided in, and
apart from that which Lord de Winter has said to me before you, he has
confided nothing to me.”

“Why, then,” cried Milady, with an incredible tone of truthfulness, “you
are not his accomplice; you do not know that he destines me to a
disgrace which all the punishments of the world cannot equal in horror?”

“You are deceived, madame,” said Felton, blushing; “Lord de Winter is
not capable of such a crime.”

“Good,” said Milady to herself; “without thinking what it is, he calls
it a crime!” Then aloud, “The friend of THAT WRETCH is capable of
everything.”

“Whom do you call ‘that wretch’?” asked Felton.

“Are there, then, in England two men to whom such an epithet can be
applied?”

“You mean George Villiers?” asked Felton, whose looks became excited.

“Whom Pagans and unbelieving Gentiles call Duke of Buckingham,” replied
Milady. “I could not have thought that there was an Englishman in all
England who would have required so long an explanation to make him
understand of whom I was speaking.”

“The hand of the Lord is stretched over him,” said Felton; “he will not
escape the chastisement he deserves.”

Felton only expressed, with regard to the duke, the feeling of
execration which all the English had declared toward him whom the
Catholics themselves called the extortioner, the pillager, the
debauchee, and whom the Puritans styled simply Satan.

“Oh, my God, my God!” cried Milady; “when I supplicate thee to pour upon
this man the chastisement which is his due, thou knowest it is not my
own vengeance I pursue, but the deliverance of a whole nation that I
implore!”

“Do you know him, then?” asked Felton.

“At length he interrogates me!” said Milady to herself, at the height of
joy at having obtained so quickly such a great result. “Oh, know him?
Yes, yes! to my misfortune, to my eternal misfortune!” and Milady
twisted her arms as if in a paroxysm of grief.

Felton no doubt felt within himself that his strength was abandoning
him, and he made several steps toward the door; but the prisoner, whose
eye never left him, sprang in pursuit of him and stopped him.

“Sir,” cried she, “be kind, be clement, listen to my prayer! That knife,
which the fatal prudence of the baron deprived me of, because he knows
the use I would make of it! Oh, hear me to the end! that knife, give it
to me for a minute only, for mercy’s, for pity’s sake! I will embrace
your knees! You shall shut the door that you may be certain I
contemplate no injury to you! My God! to you--the only just, good, and
compassionate being I have met with! To you--my preserver, perhaps! One
minute that knife, one minute, a single minute, and I will restore it to
you through the grating of the door. Only one minute, Mr. Felton, and
you will have saved my honor!”

“To kill yourself?” cried Felton, with terror, forgetting to withdraw
his hands from the hands of the prisoner, “to kill yourself?”

“I have told, sir,” murmured Milady, lowering her voice, and allowing
herself to sink overpowered to the ground; “I have told my secret! He
knows all! My God, I am lost!”

Felton remained standing, motionless and undecided.

“He still doubts,” thought Milady; “I have not been earnest enough.”

Someone was heard in the corridor; Milady recognized the step of Lord de
Winter.

Felton recognized it also, and made a step toward the door.

Milady sprang toward him. “Oh, not a word,” said she in a concentrated
voice, “not a word of all that I have said to you to this man, or I am
lost, and it would be you--you--”

Then as the steps drew near, she became silent for fear of being heard,
applying, with a gesture of infinite terror, her beautiful hand to
Felton’s mouth.

Felton gently repulsed Milady, and she sank into a chair.

Lord de Winter passed before the door without stopping, and they heard
the noise of his footsteps soon die away.

Felton, as pale as death, remained some instants with his ear bent and
listening; then, when the sound was quite extinct, he breathed like a
man awaking from a dream, and rushed out of the apartment.

“Ah!” said Milady, listening in her turn to the noise of Felton’s steps,
which withdrew in a direction opposite to those of Lord de Winter; “at
length you are mine!”

Then her brow darkened. “If he tells the baron,” said she, “I am
lost--for the baron, who knows very well that I shall not kill myself,
will place me before him with a knife in my hand, and he will discover
that all this despair is but acted.”

She placed herself before the glass, and regarded herself attentively;
never had she appeared more beautiful.

“Oh, yes,” said she, smiling, “but we won’t tell him!”

In the evening Lord de Winter accompanied the supper.

“Sir,” said Milady, “is your presence an indispensable accessory of my
captivity? Could you not spare me the increase of torture which your
visits cause me?”

“How, dear sister!” said Lord de Winter. “Did not you sentimentally
inform me with that pretty mouth of yours, so cruel to me today, that
you came to England solely for the pleasure of seeing me at your ease,
an enjoyment of which you told me you so sensibly felt the deprivation
that you had risked everything for it--seasickness, tempest, captivity?
Well, here I am; be satisfied. Besides, this time, my visit has a
motive.”

Milady trembled; she thought Felton had told all. Perhaps never in her
life had this woman, who had experienced so many opposite and powerful
emotions, felt her heart beat so violently.

She was seated. Lord de Winter took a chair, drew it toward her, and sat
down close beside her. Then taking a paper out of his pocket, he
unfolded it slowly.

“Here,” said he, “I want to show you the kind of passport which I have
drawn up, and which will serve you henceforward as the rule of order in
the life I consent to leave you.”

Then turning his eyes from Milady to the paper, he read: “‘Order to
conduct--’ The name is blank,” interrupted Lord de Winter. “If you have
any preference you can point it out to me; and if it be not within a
thousand leagues of London, attention will be paid to your wishes. I
will begin again, then:

“‘Order to conduct to--the person named Charlotte Backson, branded by
the justice of the kingdom of France, but liberated after chastisement.
She is to dwell in this place without ever going more than three leagues
from it. In case of any attempt to escape, the penalty of death is to be
applied. She will receive five shillings per day for lodging and food’”.

“That order does not concern me,” replied Milady, coldly, “since it
bears another name than mine.”

“A name? Have you a name, then?”

“I bear that of your brother.”

“Ay, but you are mistaken. My brother is only your second husband; and
your first is still living. Tell me his name, and I will put it in the
place of the name of Charlotte Backson. No? You will not? You are
silent? Well, then you must be registered as Charlotte Backson.”

Milady remained silent; only this time it was no longer from
affectation, but from terror. She believed the order ready for
execution. She thought that Lord de Winter had hastened her departure;
she thought she was condemned to set off that very evening. Everything
in her mind was lost for an instant; when all at once she perceived that
no signature was attached to the order. The joy she felt at this
discovery was so great she could not conceal it.

“Yes, yes,” said Lord de Winter, who perceived what was passing in her
mind; “yes, you look for the signature, and you say to yourself: ‘All is
not lost, for that order is not signed. It is only shown to me to
terrify me, that’s all.’ You are mistaken. Tomorrow this order will be
sent to the Duke of Buckingham. The day after tomorrow it will return
signed by his hand and marked with his seal; and four-and-twenty hours
afterward I will answer for its being carried into execution. Adieu,
madame. That is all I had to say to you.”

“And I reply to you, sir, that this abuse of power, this exile under a
fictitious name, are infamous!”

“Would you like better to be hanged in your true name, Milady? You know
that the English laws are inexorable on the abuse of marriage. Speak
freely. Although my name, or rather that of my brother, would be mixed
up with the affair, I will risk the scandal of a public trial to make
myself certain of getting rid of you.”

Milady made no reply, but became as pale as a corpse.

“Oh, I see you prefer peregrination. That’s well madame; and there is an
old proverb that says, ‘Traveling trains youth.’ My faith! you are not
wrong after all, and life is sweet. That’s the reason why I take such
care you shall not deprive me of mine. There only remains, then, the
question of the five shillings to be settled. You think me rather
parsimonious, don’t you? That’s because I don’t care to leave you the
means of corrupting your jailers. Besides, you will always have your
charms left to seduce them with. Employ them, if your check with regard
to Felton has not disgusted you with attempts of that kind.”

“Felton has not told him,” said Milady to herself. “Nothing is lost,
then.”

“And now, madame, till I see you again! Tomorrow I will come and
announce to you the departure of my messenger.”

Lord de Winter rose, saluted her ironically, and went out.

Milady breathed again. She had still four days before her. Four days
would quite suffice to complete the seduction of Felton.

A terrible idea, however, rushed into her mind. She thought that Lord de
Winter would perhaps send Felton himself to get the order signed by the
Duke of Buckingham. In that case Felton would escape her--for in order
to secure success, the magic of a continuous seduction was necessary.
Nevertheless, as we have said, one circumstance reassured her. Felton
had not spoken.

As she would not appear to be agitated by the threats of Lord de Winter,
she placed herself at the table and ate.

Then, as she had done the evening before, she fell on her knees and
repeated her prayers aloud. As on the evening before, the soldier
stopped his march to listen to her.

Soon after she heard lighter steps than those of the sentinel, which
came from the end of the corridor and stopped before her door.

“It is he,” said she. And she began the same religious chant which had
so strongly excited Felton the evening before.

But although her voice--sweet, full, and sonorous--vibrated as
harmoniously and as affectingly as ever, the door remained shut. It
appeared however to Milady that in one of the furtive glances she darted
from time to time at the grating of the door she thought she saw the
ardent eyes of the young man through the narrow opening. But whether
this was reality or vision, he had this time sufficient self-command not
to enter.

However, a few instants after she had finished her religious song,
Milady thought she heard a profound sigh. Then the same steps she had
heard approach slowly withdrew, as if with regret.




55 CAPTIVITY: THE FOURTH DAY


The next day, when Felton entered Milady’s apartment he found her
standing, mounted upon a chair, holding in her hands a cord made by
means of torn cambric handkerchiefs, twisted into a kind of rope one
with another, and tied at the ends. At the noise Felton made in
entering, Milady leaped lightly to the ground, and tried to conceal
behind her the improvised cord she held in her hand.

The young man was more pale than usual, and his eyes, reddened by want
of sleep, denoted that he had passed a feverish night. Nevertheless, his
brow was armed with a severity more austere than ever.

He advanced slowly toward Milady, who had seated herself, and taking an
end of the murderous rope which by neglect, or perhaps by design, she
allowed to be seen, “What is this, madame?” he asked coldly.

“That? Nothing,” said Milady, smiling with that painful expression which
she knew so well how to give to her smile. “Ennui is the mortal enemy of
prisoners; I had ennui, and I amused myself with twisting that rope.”

Felton turned his eyes toward the part of the wall of the apartment
before which he had found Milady standing in the armchair in which she
was now seated, and over her head he perceived a gilt-headed screw,
fixed in the wall for the purpose of hanging up clothes or weapons.

He started, and the prisoner saw that start--for though her eyes were
cast down, nothing escaped her.

“What were you doing on that armchair?” asked he.

“Of what consequence?” replied Milady.

“But,” replied Felton, “I wish to know.”

“Do not question me,” said the prisoner; “you know that we who are true
Christians are forbidden to lie.”

“Well, then,” said Felton, “I will tell you what you were doing, or
rather what you meant to do; you were going to complete the fatal
project you cherish in your mind. Remember, madame, if our God forbids
falsehood, he much more severely condemns suicide.”

“When God sees one of his creatures persecuted unjustly, placed between
suicide and dishonor, believe me, sir,” replied Milady, in a tone of
deep conviction, “God pardons suicide, for then suicide becomes
martyrdom.”

“You say either too much or too little; speak, madame. In the name of
heaven, explain yourself.”

“That I may relate my misfortunes for you to treat them as fables; that
I may tell you my projects for you to go and betray them to my
persecutor? No, sir. Besides, of what importance to you is the life or
death of a condemned wretch? You are only responsible for my body, is it
not so? And provided you produce a carcass that may be recognized as
mine, they will require no more of you; nay, perhaps you will even have
a double reward.”

“I, madame, I?” cried Felton. “You suppose that I would ever accept the
price of your life? Oh, you cannot believe what you say!”

“Let me act as I please, Felton, let me act as I please,” said Milady,
elated. “Every soldier must be ambitious, must he not? You are a
lieutenant? Well, you will follow me to the grave with the rank of
captain.”

“What have I, then, done to you,” said Felton, much agitated, “that you
should load me with such a responsibility before God and before men? In
a few days you will be away from this place; your life, madame, will
then no longer be under my care, and,” added he, with a sigh, “then you
can do what you will with it.”

“So,” cried Milady, as if she could not resist giving utterance to a
holy indignation, “you, a pious man, you who are called a just man, you
ask but one thing--and that is that you may not be inculpated, annoyed,
by my death!”

“It is my duty to watch over your life, madame, and I will watch.”

“But do you understand the mission you are fulfilling? Cruel enough, if
I am guilty; but what name can you give it, what name will the Lord give
it, if I am innocent?”

“I am a soldier, madame, and fulfill the orders I have received.”

“Do you believe, then, that at the day of the Last Judgment God will
separate blind executioners from iniquitous judges? You are not willing
that I should kill my body, and you make yourself the agent of him who
would kill my soul.”

“But I repeat it again to you,” replied Felton, in great emotion, “no
danger threatens you; I will answer for Lord de Winter as for myself.”

“Dunce,” cried Milady, “dunce! who dares to answer for another man, when
the wisest, when those most after God’s own heart, hesitate to answer
for themselves, and who ranges himself on the side of the strongest and
the most fortunate, to crush the weakest and the most unfortunate.”

“Impossible, madame, impossible,” murmured Felton, who felt to the
bottom of his heart the justness of this argument. “A prisoner, you will
not recover your liberty through me; living, you will not lose your life
through me.”

“Yes,” cried Milady, “but I shall lose that which is much dearer to me
than life, I shall lose my honor, Felton; and it is you, you whom I make
responsible, before God and before men, for my shame and my infamy.”

This time Felton, immovable as he was, or appeared to be, could not
resist the secret influence which had already taken possession of him.
To see this woman, so beautiful, fair as the brightest vision, to see
her by turns overcome with grief and threatening; to resist at once the
ascendancy of grief and beauty--it was too much for a visionary; it was
too much for a brain weakened by the ardent dreams of an ecstatic faith;
it was too much for a heart furrowed by the love of heaven that burns,
by the hatred of men that devours.

Milady saw the trouble. She felt by intuition the flame of the opposing
passions which burned with the blood in the veins of the young fanatic.
As a skillful general, seeing the enemy ready to surrender, marches
toward him with a cry of victory, she rose, beautiful as an antique
priestess, inspired like a Christian virgin, her arms extended, her
throat uncovered, her hair disheveled, holding with one hand her robe
modestly drawn over her breast, her look illumined by that fire which
had already created such disorder in the veins of the young Puritan, and
went toward him, crying out with a vehement air, and in her melodious
voice, to which on this occasion she communicated a terrible energy:

“Let this victim to Baal be sent, To the lions the martyr be thrown! Thy
God shall teach thee to repent! From th’ abyss he’ll give ear to my
moan.”

Felton stood before this strange apparition like one petrified.

“Who art thou? Who art thou?” cried he, clasping his hands. “Art thou a
messenger from God; art thou a minister from hell; art thou an angel or
a demon; callest thou thyself Eloa or Astarte?”

“Do you not know me, Felton? I am neither an angel nor a demon; I am a
daughter of earth, I am a sister of thy faith, that is all.”

“Yes, yes!” said Felton, “I doubted, but now I believe.”

“You believe, and still you are an accomplice of that child of Belial
who is called Lord de Winter! You believe, and yet you leave me in the
hands of mine enemies, of the enemy of England, of the enemy of God! You
believe, and yet you deliver me up to him who fills and defiles the
world with his heresies and debaucheries--to that infamous Sardanapalus
whom the blind call the Duke of Buckingham, and whom believers name
Antichrist!”

“I deliver you up to Buckingham? I? what mean you by that?”

“They have eyes,” cried Milady, “but they see not; ears have they, but
they hear not.”

“Yes, yes!” said Felton, passing his hands over his brow, covered with
sweat, as if to remove his last doubt. “Yes, I recognize the voice which
speaks to me in my dreams; yes, I recognize the features of the angel
who appears to me every night, crying to my soul, which cannot sleep:
‘Strike, save England, save thyself--for thou wilt die without having
appeased God!’ Speak, speak!” cried Felton, “I can understand you now.”

A flash of terrible joy, but rapid as thought, gleamed from the eyes of
Milady.

However fugitive this homicide flash, Felton saw it, and started as if
its light had revealed the abysses of this woman’s heart. He recalled,
all at once, the warnings of Lord de Winter, the seductions of Milady,
her first attempts after her arrival. He drew back a step, and hung down
his head, without, however, ceasing to look at her, as if, fascinated by
this strange creature, he could not detach his eyes from her eyes.

Milady was not a woman to misunderstand the meaning of this hesitation.
Under her apparent emotions her icy coolness never abandoned her. Before
Felton replied, and before she should be forced to resume this
conversation, so difficult to be sustained in the same exalted tone, she
let her hands fall; and as if the weakness of the woman overpowered the
enthusiasm of the inspired fanatic, she said: “But no, it is not for me
to be the Judith to deliver Bethulia from this Holofernes. The sword of
the eternal is too heavy for my arm. Allow me, then, to avoid dishonor
by death; let me take refuge in martyrdom. I do not ask you for liberty,
as a guilty one would, nor for vengeance, as would a pagan. Let me die;
that is all. I supplicate you, I implore you on my knees--let me die,
and my last sigh shall be a blessing for my preserver.”

Hearing that voice, so sweet and suppliant, seeing that look, so timid
and downcast, Felton reproached himself. By degrees the enchantress had
clothed herself with that magic adornment which she assumed and threw
aside at will; that is to say, beauty, meekness, and tears--and above
all, the irresistible attraction of mystical voluptuousness, the most
devouring of all voluptuousness.

“Alas!” said Felton, “I can do but one thing, which is to pity you if
you prove to me you are a victim! But Lord de Winter makes cruel
accusations against you. You are a Christian; you are my sister in
religion. I feel myself drawn toward you--I, who have never loved anyone
but my benefactor--I who have met with nothing but traitors and impious
men. But you, madame, so beautiful in reality, you, so pure in
appearance, must have committed great iniquities for Lord de Winter to
pursue you thus.”

“They have eyes,” repeated Milady, with an accent of indescribable
grief, “but they see not; ears have they, but they hear not.”

“But,” cried the young officer, “speak, then, speak!”

“Confide my shame to you,” cried Milady, with the blush of modesty upon
her countenance, “for often the crime of one becomes the shame of
another--confide my shame to you, a man, and I a woman? Oh,” continued
she, placing her hand modestly over her beautiful eyes, “never!
never!--I could not!”

“To me, to a brother?” said Felton.

Milady looked at him for some time with an expression which the young
man took for doubt, but which, however, was nothing but observation, or
rather the wish to fascinate.

Felton, in his turn a suppliant, clasped his hands.

“Well, then,” said Milady, “I confide in my brother; I will dare to--”

At this moment the steps of Lord de Winter were heard; but this time the
terrible brother-in-law of Milady did not content himself, as on the
preceding day, with passing before the door and going away again. He
paused, exchanged two words with the sentinel; then the door opened, and
he appeared.

During the exchange of these two words Felton drew back quickly, and
when Lord de Winter entered, he was several paces from the prisoner.

The baron entered slowly, sending a scrutinizing glance from Milady to
the young officer.

“You have been here a very long time, John,” said he. “Has this woman
been relating her crimes to you? In that case I can comprehend the
length of the conversation.”

Felton started; and Milady felt she was lost if she did not come to the
assistance of the disconcerted Puritan.

“Ah, you fear your prisoner should escape!” said she. “Well, ask your
worthy jailer what favor I this instant solicited of him.”

“You demanded a favor?” said the baron, suspiciously.

“Yes, my Lord,” replied the young man, confused.

“And what favor, pray?” asked Lord de Winter.

“A knife, which she would return to me through the grating of the door a
minute after she had received it,” replied Felton.

“There is someone, then, concealed here whose throat this amiable lady
is desirous of cutting,” said de Winter, in an ironical, contemptuous
tone.

“There is myself,” replied Milady.

“I have given you the choice between America and Tyburn,” replied Lord
de Winter. “Choose Tyburn, madame. Believe me, the cord is more certain
than the knife.”

Felton grew pale, and made a step forward, remembering that at the
moment he entered Milady had a rope in her hand.

“You are right,” said she, “I have often thought of it.” Then she added
in a low voice, “And I will think of it again.”

Felton felt a shudder run to the marrow of his bones; probably Lord de
Winter perceived this emotion.

“Mistrust yourself, John,” said he. “I have placed reliance upon you, my
friend. Beware! I have warned you! But be of good courage, my lad; in
three days we shall be delivered from this creature, and where I shall
send her she can harm nobody.”

“You hear him!” cried Milady, with vehemence, so that the baron might
believe she was addressing heaven, and that Felton might understand she
was addressing him.

Felton lowered his head and reflected.

The baron took the young officer by the arm, and turned his head over
his shoulder, so as not to lose sight of Milady till he was gone out.

“Well,” said the prisoner, when the door was shut, “I am not so far
advanced as I believed. De Winter has changed his usual stupidity into a
strange prudence. It is the desire of vengeance, and how desire molds a
man! As to Felton, he hesitates. Ah, he is not a man like that cursed
d’Artagnan. A Puritan only adores virgins, and he adores them by
clasping his hands. A Musketeer loves women, and he loves them by
clasping his arms round them.”

Milady waited, then, with much impatience, for she feared the day would
pass away without her seeing Felton again. At last, in an hour after the
scene we have just described, she heard someone speaking in a low voice
at the door. Presently the door opened, and she perceived Felton.

The young man advanced rapidly into the chamber, leaving the door open
behind him, and making a sign to Milady to be silent; his face was much
agitated.

“What do you want with me?” said she.

“Listen,” replied Felton, in a low voice. “I have just sent away the
sentinel that I might remain here without anybody knowing it, in order
to speak to you without being overheard. The baron has just related a
frightful story to me.”

Milady assumed her smile of a resigned victim, and shook her head.

“Either you are a demon,” continued Felton, “or the baron--my
benefactor, my father--is a monster. I have known you four days; I have
loved him four years. I therefore may hesitate between you. Be not
alarmed at what I say; I want to be convinced. Tonight, after twelve, I
will come and see you, and you shall convince me.”

“No, Felton, no, my brother,” said she; “the sacrifice is too great, and
I feel what it must cost you. No, I am lost; do not be lost with me. My
death will be much more eloquent than my life, and the silence of the
corpse will convince you much better than the words of the prisoner.”

“Be silent, madame,” cried Felton, “and do not speak to me thus; I came
to entreat you to promise me upon your honor, to swear to me by what you
hold most sacred, that you will make no attempt upon your life.”

“I will not promise,” said Milady, “for no one has more respect for a
promise or an oath than I have; and if I make a promise I must keep it.”

“Well,” said Felton, “only promise till you have seen me again. If, when
you have seen me again, you still persist--well, then you shall be free,
and I myself will give you the weapon you desire.”

“Well,” said Milady, “for you I will wait.”

“Swear.”

“I swear it, by our God. Are you satisfied?”

“Well,” said Felton, “till tonight.”

And he darted out of the room, shut the door, and waited in the
corridor, the soldier’s half-pike in his hand, and as if he had mounted
guard in his place.

The soldier returned, and Felton gave him back his weapon.

Then, through the grating to which she had drawn near, Milady saw the
young man make a sign with delirious fervor, and depart in an apparent
transport of joy.

As for her, she returned to her place with a smile of savage contempt
upon her lips, and repeated, blaspheming, that terrible name of God, by
whom she had just sworn without ever having learned to know Him.

“My God,” said she, “what a senseless fanatic! My God, it is I--I--and
this fellow who will help me to avenge myself.”




56 CAPTIVITY: THE FIFTH DAY


Milady had however achieved a half-triumph, and success doubled her
forces.

It was not difficult to conquer, as she had hitherto done, men prompt to
let themselves be seduced, and whom the gallant education of a court led
quickly into her net. Milady was handsome enough not to find much
resistance on the part of the flesh, and she was sufficiently skillful
to prevail over all the obstacles of the mind.

But this time she had to contend with an unpolished nature, concentrated
and insensible by force of austerity. Religion and its observances had
made Felton a man inaccessible to ordinary seductions. There fermented
in that sublimated brain plans so vast, projects so tumultuous, that
there remained no room for any capricious or material love--that
sentiment which is fed by leisure and grows with corruption. Milady had,
then, made a breach by her false virtue in the opinion of a man horribly
prejudiced against her, and by her beauty in the heart of a man hitherto
chaste and pure. In short, she had taken the measure of motives hitherto
unknown to herself, through this experiment, made upon the most
rebellious subject that nature and religion could submit to her study.

Many a time, nevertheless, during the evening she despaired of fate and
of herself. She did not invoke God, we very well know, but she had faith
in the genius of evil--that immense sovereignty which reigns in all the
details of human life, and by which, as in the Arabian fable, a single
pomegranate seed is sufficient to reconstruct a ruined world.

Milady, being well prepared for the reception of Felton, was able to
erect her batteries for the next day. She knew she had only two days
left; that when once the order was signed by Buckingham--and Buckingham
would sign it the more readily from its bearing a false name, and he
could not, therefore, recognize the woman in question--once this order
was signed, we say, the baron would make her embark immediately, and she
knew very well that women condemned to exile employ arms much less
powerful in their seductions than the pretendedly virtuous woman whose
beauty is lighted by the sun of the world, whose style the voice of
fashion lauds, and whom a halo of aristocracy gilds with enchanting
splendors. To be a woman condemned to a painful and disgraceful
punishment is no impediment to beauty, but it is an obstacle to the
recovery of power. Like all persons of real genius, Milady knew what
suited her nature and her means. Poverty was repugnant to her;
degradation took away two-thirds of her greatness. Milady was only a
queen while among queens. The pleasure of satisfied pride was necessary
to her domination. To command inferior beings was rather a humiliation
than a pleasure for her.

She should certainly return from her exile--she did not doubt that a
single instant; but how long might this exile last? For an active,
ambitious nature, like that of Milady, days not spent in climbing are
inauspicious days. What word, then, can be found to describe the days
which they occupy in descending? To lose a year, two years, three years,
is to talk of an eternity; to return after the death or disgrace of the
cardinal, perhaps; to return when d’Artagnan and his friends, happy and
triumphant, should have received from the queen the reward they had well
acquired by the services they had rendered her--these were devouring
ideas that a woman like Milady could not endure. For the rest, the storm
which raged within her doubled her strength, and she would have burst
the walls of her prison if her body had been able to take for a single
instant the proportions of her mind.

Then that which spurred her on additionally in the midst of all this was
the remembrance of the cardinal. What must the mistrustful, restless,
suspicious cardinal think of her silence--the cardinal, not merely her
only support, her only prop, her only protector at present, but still
further, the principal instrument of her future fortune and vengeance?
She knew him; she knew that at her return from a fruitless journey it
would be in vain to tell him of her imprisonment, in vain to enlarge
upon the sufferings she had undergone. The cardinal would reply, with
the sarcastic calmness of the skeptic, strong at once by power and
genius, “You should not have allowed yourself to be taken.”

Then Milady collected all her energies, murmuring in the depths of her
soul the name of Felton--the only beam of light that penetrated to her
in the hell into which she had fallen; and like a serpent which folds
and unfolds its rings to ascertain its strength, she enveloped Felton
beforehand in the thousand meshes of her inventive imagination.

Time, however, passed away; the hours, one after another, seemed to
awaken the clock as they passed, and every blow of the brass hammer
resounded upon the heart of the prisoner. At nine o’clock, Lord de
Winter made his customary visit, examined the window and the bars,
sounded the floor and the walls, looked to the chimney and the doors,
without, during this long and minute examination, he or Milady
pronouncing a single word.

Doubtless both of them understood that the situation had become too
serious to lose time in useless words and aimless wrath.

“Well,” said the baron, on leaving her “you will not escape tonight!”

At ten o’clock Felton came and placed the sentinel. Milady recognized
his step. She was as well acquainted with it now as a mistress is with
that of the lover of her heart; and yet Milady at the same time detested
and despised this weak fanatic.

That was not the appointed hour. Felton did not enter.

Two hours after, as midnight sounded, the sentinel was relieved. This
time it WAS the hour, and from this moment Milady waited with
impatience. The new sentinel commenced his walk in the corridor. At the
expiration of ten minutes Felton came.

Milady was all attention.

“Listen,” said the young man to the sentinel. “On no pretense leave the
door, for you know that last night my Lord punished a soldier for having
quit his post for an instant, although I, during his absence, watched in
his place.”

“Yes, I know it,” said the soldier.

“I recommend you therefore to keep the strictest watch. For my part I am
going to pay a second visit to this woman, who I fear entertains
sinister intentions upon her own life, and I have received orders to
watch her.”

“Good!” murmured Milady; “the austere Puritan lies.”

As to the soldier, he only smiled.

“Zounds, Lieutenant!” said he; “you are not unlucky in being charged
with such commissions, particularly if my Lord has authorized you to
look into her bed.”

Felton blushed. Under any other circumstances he would have reprimanded
the soldier for indulging in such pleasantry, but his conscience
murmured too loud for his mouth to dare speak.

“If I call, come,” said he. “If anyone comes, call me.”

“I will, Lieutenant,” said the soldier.

Felton entered Milady’s apartment. Milady arose.

“You are here!” said she.

“I promised to come,” said Felton, “and I have come.”

“You promised me something else.”

“What, my God!” said the young man, who in spite of his self-command
felt his knees tremble and the sweat start from his brow.

“You promised to bring a knife, and to leave it with me after our
interview.”

“Say no more of that, madame,” said Felton. “There is no situation,
however terrible it may be, which can authorize a creature of God to
inflict death upon himself. I have reflected, and I cannot, must not be
guilty of such a sin.”

“Ah, you have reflected!” said the prisoner, sitting down in her
armchair, with a smile of disdain; “and I also have reflected.”

“Upon what?”

“That I can have nothing to say to a man who does not keep his word.”

“Oh, my God!” murmured Felton.

“You may retire,” said Milady. “I will not talk.”

“Here is the knife,” said Felton, drawing from his pocket the weapon
which he had brought, according to his promise, but which he hesitated
to give to his prisoner.

“Let me see it,” said Milady.

“For what purpose?”

“Upon my honor, I will instantly return it to you. You shall place it on
that table, and you may remain between it and me.”

Felton offered the weapon to Milady, who examined the temper of it
attentively, and who tried the point on the tip of her finger.

“Well,” said she, returning the knife to the young officer, “this is
fine and good steel. You are a faithful friend, Felton.”

Felton took back the weapon, and laid it upon the table, as he had
agreed with the prisoner.

Milady followed him with her eyes, and made a gesture of satisfaction.

“Now,” said she, “listen to me.”

The request was needless. The young officer stood upright before her,
awaiting her words as if to devour them.

“Felton,” said Milady, with a solemnity full of melancholy, “imagine
that your sister, the daughter of your father, speaks to you. While yet
young, unfortunately handsome, I was dragged into a snare. I resisted.
Ambushes and violences multiplied around me, but I resisted. The
religion I serve, the God I adore, were blasphemed because I called upon
that religion and that God, but still I resisted. Then outrages were
heaped upon me, and as my soul was not subdued they wished to defile my
body forever. Finally--”

Milady stopped, and a bitter smile passed over her lips.

“Finally,” said Felton, “finally, what did they do?”

“At length, one evening my enemy resolved to paralyze the resistance he
could not conquer. One evening he mixed a powerful narcotic with my
water. Scarcely had I finished my repast, when I felt myself sink by
degrees into a strange torpor. Although I was without mistrust, a vague
fear seized me, and I tried to struggle against sleepiness. I arose. I
wished to run to the window and call for help, but my legs refused their
office. It appeared as if the ceiling sank upon my head and crushed me
with its weight. I stretched out my arms. I tried to speak. I could only
utter inarticulate sounds, and irresistible faintness came over me. I
supported myself by a chair, feeling that I was about to fall, but this
support was soon insufficient on account of my weak arms. I fell upon
one knee, then upon both. I tried to pray, but my tongue was frozen. God
doubtless neither heard nor saw me, and I sank upon the floor a prey to
a slumber which resembled death.

“Of all that passed in that sleep, or the time which glided away while
it lasted, I have no remembrance. The only thing I recollect is that I
awoke in bed in a round chamber, the furniture of which was sumptuous,
and into which light only penetrated by an opening in the ceiling. No
door gave entrance to the room. It might be called a magnificent prison.

“It was a long time before I was able to make out what place I was in,
or to take account of the details I describe. My mind appeared to strive
in vain to shake off the heavy darkness of the sleep from which I could
not rouse myself. I had vague perceptions of space traversed, of the
rolling of a carriage, of a horrible dream in which my strength had
become exhausted; but all this was so dark and so indistinct in my mind
that these events seemed to belong to another life than mine, and yet
mixed with mine in fantastic duality.

“At times the state into which I had fallen appeared so strange that I
believed myself dreaming. I arose trembling. My clothes were near me on
a chair; I neither remembered having undressed myself nor going to bed.
Then by degrees the reality broke upon me, full of chaste terrors. I was
no longer in the house where I had dwelt. As well as I could judge by
the light of the sun, the day was already two-thirds gone. It was the
evening before when I had fallen asleep; my sleep, then, must have
lasted twenty-four hours! What had taken place during this long sleep?

“I dressed myself as quickly as possible; my slow and stiff motions all
attested that the effects of the narcotic were not yet entirely
dissipated. The chamber was evidently furnished for the reception of a
woman; and the most finished coquette could not have formed a wish, but
on casting her eyes about the apartment, she would have found that wish
accomplished.

“Certainly I was not the first captive that had been shut up in this
splendid prison; but you may easily comprehend, Felton, that the more
superb the prison, the greater was my terror.

“Yes, it was a prison, for I tried in vain to get out of it. I sounded
all the walls, in the hopes of discovering a door, but everywhere the
walls returned a full and flat sound.

“I made the tour of the room at least twenty times, in search of an
outlet of some kind; but there was none. I sank exhausted with fatigue
and terror into an armchair.

“Meantime, night came on rapidly, and with night my terrors increased. I
did not know but I had better remain where I was seated. It appeared
that I was surrounded with unknown dangers into which I was about to
fall at every instant. Although I had eaten nothing since the evening
before, my fears prevented my feeling hunger.

“No noise from without by which I could measure the time reached me; I
only supposed it must be seven or eight o’clock in the evening, for it
was in the month of October and it was quite dark.

“All at once the noise of a door, turning on its hinges, made me start.
A globe of fire appeared above the glazed opening of the ceiling,
casting a strong light into my chamber; and I perceived with terror that
a man was standing within a few paces of me.

“A table, with two covers, bearing a supper ready prepared, stood, as if
by magic, in the middle of the apartment.

“That man was he who had pursued me during a whole year, who had vowed
my dishonor, and who, by the first words that issued from his mouth,
gave me to understand he had accomplished it the preceding night.”

“Scoundrel!” murmured Felton.

“Oh, yes, scoundrel!” cried Milady, seeing the interest which the young
officer, whose soul seemed to hang on her lips, took in this strange
recital. “Oh, yes, scoundrel! He believed, having triumphed over me in
my sleep, that all was completed. He came, hoping that I would accept my
shame, as my shame was consummated; he came to offer his fortune in
exchange for my love.

“All that the heart of a woman could contain of haughty contempt and
disdainful words, I poured out upon this man. Doubtless he was
accustomed to such reproaches, for he listened to me calm and smiling,
with his arms crossed over his breast. Then, when he thought I had said
all, he advanced toward me; I sprang toward the table, I seized a knife,
I placed it to my breast.

“Take one step more,” said I, “and in addition to my dishonor, you shall
have my death to reproach yourself with.”

“There was, no doubt, in my look, my voice, my whole person, that
sincerity of gesture, of attitude, of accent, which carries conviction
to the most perverse minds, for he paused.

“‘Your death?’ said he; ‘oh, no, you are too charming a mistress to
allow me to consent to lose you thus, after I have had the happiness to
possess you only a single time. Adieu, my charmer; I will wait to pay
you my next visit till you are in a better humor.’

“At these words he blew a whistle; the globe of fire which lighted the
room reascended and disappeared. I found myself again in complete
darkness. The same noise of a door opening and shutting was repeated the
instant afterward; the flaming globe descended afresh, and I was
completely alone.

“This moment was frightful; if I had any doubts as to my misfortune,
these doubts had vanished in an overwhelming reality. I was in the power
of a man whom I not only detested, but despised--of a man capable of
anything, and who had already given me a fatal proof of what he was able
to do.”

“But who, then was this man?” asked Felton.

“I passed the night on a chair, starting at the least noise, for toward
midnight the lamp went out, and I was again in darkness. But the night
passed away without any fresh attempt on the part of my persecutor. Day
came; the table had disappeared, only I had still the knife in my hand.

“This knife was my only hope.

“I was worn out with fatigue. Sleeplessness inflamed my eyes; I had not
dared to sleep a single instant. The light of day reassured me; I went
and threw myself on the bed, without parting with the emancipating
knife, which I concealed under my pillow.

“When I awoke, a fresh meal was served.

“This time, in spite of my terrors, in spite of my agony, I began to
feel a devouring hunger. It was forty-eight hours since I had taken any
nourishment. I ate some bread and some fruit; then, remembering the
narcotic mixed with the water I had drunk, I would not touch that which
was placed on the table, but filled my glass at a marble fountain fixed
in the wall over my dressing table.

“And yet, notwithstanding these precautions, I remained for some time in
a terrible agitation of mind. But my fears were this time ill-founded; I
passed the day without experiencing anything of the kind I dreaded.

“I took the precaution to half empty the carafe, in order that my
suspicions might not be noticed.

“The evening came on, and with it darkness; but however profound was
this darkness, my eyes began to accustom themselves to it. I saw, amid
the shadows, the table sink through the floor; a quarter of an hour
later it reappeared, bearing my supper. In an instant, thanks to the
lamp, my chamber was once more lighted.

“I was determined to eat only such things as could not possibly have
anything soporific introduced into them. Two eggs and some fruit
composed my repast; then I drew another glass of water from my
protecting fountain, and drank it.

“At the first swallow, it appeared to me not to have the same taste as
in the morning. Suspicion instantly seized me. I paused, but I had
already drunk half a glass.

“I threw the rest away with horror, and waited, with the dew of fear
upon my brow.

“No doubt some invisible witness had seen me draw the water from that
fountain, and had taken advantage of my confidence in it, the better to
assure my ruin, so coolly resolved upon, so cruelly pursued.

“Half an hour had not passed when the same symptoms began to appear; but
as I had only drunk half a glass of the water, I contended longer, and
instead of falling entirely asleep, I sank into a state of drowsiness
which left me a perception of what was passing around me, while
depriving me of the strength either to defend myself or to fly.

“I dragged myself toward the bed, to seek the only defense I had
left--my saving knife; but I could not reach the bolster. I sank on my
knees, my hands clasped round one of the bedposts; then I felt that I
was lost.”

Felton became frightfully pale, and a convulsive tremor crept through
his whole body.

“And what was most frightful,” continued Milady, her voice altered, as
if she still experienced the same agony as at that awful minute, “was
that at this time I retained a consciousness of the danger that
threatened me; was that my soul, if I may say so, waked in my sleeping
body; was that I saw, that I heard. It is true that all was like a
dream, but it was not the less frightful.

“I saw the lamp ascend, and leave me in darkness; then I heard the
well-known creaking of the door although I had heard that door open but
twice.

“I felt instinctively that someone approached me; it is said that the
doomed wretch in the deserts of America thus feels the approach of the
serpent.

“I wished to make an effort; I attempted to cry out. By an incredible
effort of will I even raised myself up, but only to sink down again
immediately, and to fall into the arms of my persecutor.”

“Tell me who this man was!” cried the young officer.

Milady saw at a single glance all the painful feelings she inspired in
Felton by dwelling on every detail of her recital; but she would not
spare him a single pang. The more profoundly she wounded his heart, the
more certainly he would avenge her. She continued, then, as if she had
not heard his exclamation, or as if she thought the moment was not yet
come to reply to it.

“Only this time it was no longer an inert body, without feeling, that
the villain had to deal with. I have told you that without being able to
regain the complete exercise of my faculties, I retained the sense of my
danger. I struggled, then, with all my strength, and doubtless opposed,
weak as I was, a long resistance, for I heard him cry out, ‘These
miserable Puritans! I knew very well that they tired out their
executioners, but I did not believe them so strong against their
lovers!’

“Alas! this desperate resistance could not last long. I felt my strength
fail, and this time it was not my sleep that enabled the coward to
prevail, but my swoon.”

Felton listened without uttering any word or sound, except an inward
expression of agony. The sweat streamed down his marble forehead, and
his hand, under his coat, tore his breast.

“My first impulse, on coming to myself, was to feel under my pillow for
the knife I had not been able to reach; if it had not been useful for
defense, it might at least serve for expiation.

“But on taking this knife, Felton, a terrible idea occurred to me. I
have sworn to tell you all, and I will tell you all. I have promised you
the truth; I will tell it, were it to destroy me.”

“The idea came into your mind to avenge yourself on this man, did it
not?” cried Felton.

“Yes,” said Milady. “The idea was not that of a Christian, I knew; but
without doubt, that eternal enemy of our souls, that lion roaring
constantly around us, breathed it into my mind. In short, what shall I
say to you, Felton?” continued Milady, in the tone of a woman accusing
herself of a crime. “This idea occurred to me, and did not leave me; it
is of this homicidal thought that I now bear the punishment.”

“Continue, continue!” said Felton; “I am eager to see you attain your
vengeance!”

“Oh, I resolved that it should take place as soon as possible. I had no
doubt he would return the following night. During the day I had nothing
to fear.

“When the hour of breakfast came, therefore, I did not hesitate to eat
and drink. I had determined to make believe sup, but to eat nothing. I
was forced, then, to combat the fast of the evening with the nourishment
of the morning.

“Only I concealed a glass of water, which remained after my breakfast,
thirst having been the chief of my sufferings when I remained
forty-eight hours without eating or drinking.

“The day passed away without having any other influence on me than to
strengthen the resolution I had formed; only I took care that my face
should not betray the thoughts of my heart, for I had no doubt I was
watched. Several times, even, I felt a smile on my lips. Felton, I dare
not tell you at what idea I smiled; you would hold me in horror--”

“Go on! go on!” said Felton; “you see plainly that I listen, and that I
am anxious to know the end.”

“Evening came; the ordinary events took place. During the darkness, as
before, my supper was brought. Then the lamp was lighted, and I sat down
to table. I only ate some fruit. I pretended to pour out water from the
jug, but I only drank that which I had saved in my glass. The
substitution was made so carefully that my spies, if I had any, could
have no suspicion of it.

“After supper I exhibited the same marks of languor as on the preceding
evening; but this time, as I yielded to fatigue, or as if I had become
familiarized with danger, I dragged myself toward my bed, let my robe
fall, and lay down.

“I found my knife where I had placed it, under my pillow, and while
feigning to sleep, my hand grasped the handle of it convulsively.

“Two hours passed away without anything fresh happening. Oh, my God! who
could have said so the evening before? I began to fear that he would not
come.

“At length I saw the lamp rise softly, and disappear in the depths of
the ceiling; my chamber was filled with darkness and obscurity, but I
made a strong effort to penetrate this darkness and obscurity.

“Nearly ten minutes passed; I heard no other noise but the beating of my
own heart. I implored heaven that he might come.

“At length I heard the well-known noise of the door, which opened and
shut; I heard, notwithstanding the thickness of the carpet, a step which
made the floor creak; I saw, notwithstanding the darkness, a shadow
which approached my bed.”

“Haste! haste!” said Felton; “do you not see that each of your words
burns me like molten lead?”

“Then,” continued Milady, “then I collected all my strength; I recalled
to my mind that the moment of vengeance, or rather, of justice, had
struck. I looked upon myself as another Judith; I gathered myself up, my
knife in my hand, and when I saw him near me, stretching out his arms to
find his victim, then, with the last cry of agony and despair, I struck
him in the middle of his breast.

“The miserable villain! He had foreseen all. His breast was covered with
a coat-of-mail; the knife was bent against it.

“‘Ah, ah!’ cried he, seizing my arm, and wresting from me the weapon
that had so badly served me, ‘you want to take my life, do you, my
pretty Puritan? But that’s more than dislike, that’s ingratitude! Come,
come, calm yourself, my sweet girl! I thought you had softened. I am not
one of those tyrants who detain women by force. You don’t love me. With
my usual fatuity I doubted it; now I am convinced. Tomorrow you shall be
free.’

“I had but one wish; that was that he should kill me.

“‘Beware!’ said I, ‘for my liberty is your dishonor.’

“‘Explain yourself, my pretty sibyl!’

“‘Yes; for as soon as I leave this place I will tell everything. I will
proclaim the violence you have used toward me. I will describe my
captivity. I will denounce this place of infamy. You are placed on high,
my Lord, but tremble! Above you there is the king; above the king there
is God!’

“However perfect master he was over himself, my persecutor allowed a
movement of anger to escape him. I could not see the expression of his
countenance, but I felt the arm tremble upon which my hand was placed.

“‘Then you shall not leave this place,’ said he.

“‘Very well,’ cried I, ‘then the place of my punishment will be that of
my tomb. I will die here, and you will see if a phantom that accuses is
not more terrible than a living being that threatens!’

“‘You shall have no weapon left in your power.’

“‘There is a weapon which despair has placed within the reach of every
creature who has the courage to use it. I will allow myself to die with
hunger.’

“‘Come,’ said the wretch, ‘is not peace much better than such a war as
that? I will restore you to liberty this moment; I will proclaim you a
piece of immaculate virtue; I will name you the Lucretia of England.’

“‘And I will say that you are the Sextus. I will denounce you before
men, as I have denounced you before God; and if it be necessary that,
like Lucretia, I should sign my accusation with my blood, I will sign
it.’

“‘Ah!’ said my enemy, in a jeering tone, ‘that’s quite another thing. My
faith! everything considered, you are very well off here. You shall want
for nothing, and if you let yourself die of hunger that will be your own
fault.’

“At these words he retired. I heard the door open and shut, and I
remained overwhelmed, less, I confess it, by my grief than by the
mortification of not having avenged myself.

“He kept his word. All the day, all the next night passed away without
my seeing him again. But I also kept my word with him, and I neither ate
nor drank. I was, as I told him, resolved to die of hunger.

“I passed the day and the night in prayer, for I hoped that God would
pardon me my suicide.

“The second night the door opened; I was lying on the floor, for my
strength began to abandon me.

“At the noise I raised myself up on one hand.

“‘Well,’ said a voice which vibrated in too terrible a manner in my ear
not to be recognized, ‘well! Are we softened a little? Will we not pay
for our liberty with a single promise of silence? Come, I am a good sort
of a prince,’ added he, ‘and although I like not Puritans I do them
justice; and it is the same with Puritanesses, when they are pretty.
Come, take a little oath for me on the cross; I won’t ask anything more
of you.’

“‘On the cross,’ cried I, rising, for at that abhorred voice I had
recovered all my strength, ‘on the cross I swear that no promise, no
menace, no force, no torture, shall close my mouth! On the cross I swear
to denounce you everywhere as a murderer, as a thief of honor, as a base
coward! On the cross I swear, if I ever leave this place, to call down
vengeance upon you from the whole human race!’

“‘Beware!’ said the voice, in a threatening accent that I had never yet
heard. ‘I have an extraordinary means which I will not employ but in the
last extremity to close your mouth, or at least to prevent anyone from
believing a word you may utter.’

“I mustered all my strength to reply to him with a burst of laughter.

“He saw that it was a merciless war between us--a war to the death.

“‘Listen!’ said he. ‘I give you the rest of tonight and all day
tomorrow. Reflect: promise to be silent, and riches, consideration, even
honor, shall surround you; threaten to speak, and I will condemn you to
infamy.’

“‘You?’ cried I. ‘You?’

“‘To interminable, ineffaceable infamy!’

“‘You?’ repeated I. Oh, I declare to you, Felton, I thought him mad!

“‘Yes, yes, I!’ replied he.

“‘Oh, leave me!’ said I. ‘Begone, if you do not desire to see me dash my
head against that wall before your eyes!’

“‘Very well, it is your own doing. Till tomorrow evening, then!’

“‘Till tomorrow evening, then!’ replied I, allowing myself to fall, and
biting the carpet with rage.”

Felton leaned for support upon a piece of furniture; and Milady saw,
with the joy of a demon, that his strength would fail him perhaps before
the end of her recital.




57 MEANS FOR CLASSICAL TRAGEDY


After a moment of silence employed by Milady in observing the young man
who listened to her, Milady continued her recital.

“It was nearly three days since I had eaten or drunk anything. I
suffered frightful torments. At times there passed before me clouds
which pressed my brow, which veiled my eyes; this was delirium.

“When the evening came I was so weak that every time I fainted I thanked
God, for I thought I was about to die.

“In the midst of one of these swoons I heard the door open. Terror
recalled me to myself.

“He entered the apartment followed by a man in a mask. He was masked
likewise; but I knew his step, I knew his voice, I knew him by that
imposing bearing which hell has bestowed upon his person for the curse
of humanity.

“‘Well,’ said he to me, ‘have you made your mind up to take the oath I
requested of you?’

“‘You have said Puritans have but one word. Mine you have heard, and
that is to pursue you--on earth to the tribunal of men, in heaven to the
tribunal of God.’

“‘You persist, then?’

“‘I swear it before the God who hears me. I will take the whole world as
a witness of your crime, and that until I have found an avenger.’

“‘You are a prostitute,’ said he, in a voice of thunder, ‘and you shall
undergo the punishment of prostitutes! Branded in the eyes of the world
you invoke, try to prove to that world that you are neither guilty nor
mad!’

“Then, addressing the man who accompanied him, ‘Executioner,’ said he,
‘do your duty.’”

“Oh, his name, his name!” cried Felton. “His name, tell it me!”

“Then in spite of my cries, in spite of my resistance--for I began to
comprehend that there was a question of something worse than death--the
executioner seized me, threw me on the floor, fastened me with his
bonds, and suffocated by sobs, almost without sense, invoking God, who
did not listen to me, I uttered all at once a frightful cry of pain and
shame. A burning fire, a red-hot iron, the iron of the executioner, was
imprinted on my shoulder.”

Felton uttered a groan.

“Here,” said Milady, rising with the majesty of a queen, “here, Felton,
behold the new martyrdom invented for a pure young girl, the victim of
the brutality of a villain. Learn to know the heart of men, and
henceforth make yourself less easily the instrument of their unjust
vengeance.”

Milady, with a rapid gesture, opened her robe, tore the cambric that
covered her bosom, and red with feigned anger and simulated shame,
showed the young man the ineffaceable impression which dishonored that
beautiful shoulder.

“But,” cried Felton, “that is a FLEUR-DE-LIS which I see there.”

“And therein consisted the infamy,” replied Milady. “The brand of
England!--it would be necessary to prove what tribunal had imposed it on
me, and I could have made a public appeal to all the tribunals of the
kingdom; but the brand of France!--oh, by that, by THAT I was branded
indeed!”

This was too much for Felton.

Pale, motionless, overwhelmed by this frightful revelation, dazzled by
the superhuman beauty of this woman who unveiled herself before him with
an immodesty which appeared to him sublime, he ended by falling on his
knees before her as the early Christians did before those pure and holy
martyrs whom the persecution of the emperors gave up in the circus to
the sanguinary sensuality of the populace. The brand disappeared; the
beauty alone remained.

“Pardon! Pardon!” cried Felton, “oh, pardon!”

Milady read in his eyes LOVE! LOVE!

“Pardon for what?” asked she.

“Pardon me for having joined with your persecutors.”

Milady held out her hand to him.

“So beautiful! so young!” cried Felton, covering that hand with his
kisses.

Milady let one of those looks fall upon him which make a slave of a
king.

Felton was a Puritan; he abandoned the hand of this woman to kiss her
feet.

He no longer loved her; he adored her.

When this crisis was past, when Milady appeared to have resumed her
self-possession, which she had never lost; when Felton had seen her
recover with the veil of chastity those treasures of love which were
only concealed from him to make him desire them the more ardently, he
said, “Ah, now! I have only one thing to ask of you; that is, the name
of your true executioner. For to me there is but one; the other was an
instrument, that was all.”

“What, brother!” cried Milady, “must I name him again? Have you not yet
divined who he is?”

“What?” cried Felton, “he--again he--always he? What--the truly guilty?”

“The truly guilty,” said Milady, “is the ravager of England, the
persecutor of true believers, the base ravisher of the honor of so many
women--he who, to satisfy a caprice of his corrupt heart, is about to
make England shed so much blood, who protects the Protestants today and
will betray them tomorrow--”

“Buckingham! It is, then, Buckingham!” cried Felton, in a high state of
excitement.

Milady concealed her face in her hands, as if she could not endure the
shame which this name recalled to her.

“Buckingham, the executioner of this angelic creature!” cried Felton.
“And thou hast not hurled thy thunder at him, my God! And thou hast left
him noble, honored, powerful, for the ruin of us all!”

“God abandons him who abandons himself,” said Milady.

“But he will draw upon his head the punishment reserved for the damned!”
said Felton, with increasing exultation. “He wills that human vengeance
should precede celestial justice.”

“Men fear him and spare him.”

“I,” said Felton, “I do not fear him, nor will I spare him.”

The soul of Milady was bathed in an infernal joy.

“But how can Lord de Winter, my protector, my father,” asked Felton,
“possibly be mixed up with all this?”

“Listen, Felton,” resumed Milady, “for by the side of base and
contemptible men there are often found great and generous natures. I had
an affianced husband, a man whom I loved, and who loved me--a heart like
yours, Felton, a man like you. I went to him and told him all; he knew
me, that man did, and did not doubt an instant. He was a nobleman, a man
equal to Buckingham in every respect. He said nothing; he only girded on
his sword, wrapped himself in his cloak, and went straight to Buckingham
Palace.

“Yes, yes,” said Felton; “I understand how he would act. But with such
men it is not the sword that should be employed; it is the poniard.”

“Buckingham had left England the day before, sent as ambassador to
Spain, to demand the hand of the Infanta for King Charles I, who was
then only Prince of Wales. My affianced husband returned.

“‘Hear me,’ said he; ‘this man has gone, and for the moment has
consequently escaped my vengeance; but let us be united, as we were to
have been, and then leave it to Lord de Winter to maintain his own honor
and that of his wife.’”

“Lord de Winter!” cried Felton.

“Yes,” said Milady, “Lord de Winter; and now you can understand it all,
can you not? Buckingham remained nearly a year absent. A week before his
return Lord de Winter died, leaving me his sole heir. Whence came the
blow? God who knows all, knows without doubt; but as for me, I accuse
nobody.”

“Oh, what an abyss; what an abyss!” cried Felton.

“Lord de Winter died without revealing anything to his brother. The
terrible secret was to be concealed till it burst, like a clap of
thunder, over the head of the guilty. Your protector had seen with pain
this marriage of his elder brother with a portionless girl. I was
sensible that I could look for no support from a man disappointed in his
hopes of an inheritance. I went to France, with a determination to
remain there for the rest of my life. But all my fortune is in England.
Communication being closed by the war, I was in want of everything. I
was then obliged to come back again. Six days ago, I landed at
Portsmouth.”

“Well?” said Felton.

“Well; Buckingham heard by some means, no doubt, of my return. He spoke
of me to Lord de Winter, already prejudiced against me, and told him
that his sister-in-law was a prostitute, a branded woman. The noble and
pure voice of my husband was no longer here to defend me. Lord de Winter
believed all that was told him with so much the more ease that it was
his interest to believe it. He caused me to be arrested, had me
conducted hither, and placed me under your guard. You know the rest. The
day after tomorrow he banishes me, he transports me; the day after
tomorrow he exiles me among the infamous. Oh, the train is well laid;
the plot is clever. My honor will not survive it! You see, then, Felton,
I can do nothing but die. Felton, give me that knife!”

And at these words, as if all her strength was exhausted, Milady sank,
weak and languishing, into the arms of the young officer, who,
intoxicated with love, anger, and voluptuous sensations hitherto
unknown, received her with transport, pressed her against his heart, all
trembling at the breath from that charming mouth, bewildered by the
contact with that palpitating bosom.

“No, no,” said he. “No, you shall live honored and pure; you shall live
to triumph over your enemies.”

Milady put him from her slowly with her hand, while drawing him nearer
with her look; but Felton, in his turn, embraced her more closely,
imploring her like a divinity.

“Oh, death, death!” said she, lowering her voice and her eyelids, “oh,
death, rather than shame! Felton, my brother, my friend, I conjure you!”

“No,” cried Felton, “no; you shall live and you shall be avenged.”

“Felton, I bring misfortune to all who surround me! Felton, abandon me!
Felton, let me die!”

“Well, then, we will live and die together!” cried he, pressing his lips
to those of the prisoner.

Several strokes resounded on the door; this time Milady really pushed
him away from her.

“Hark,” said she, “we have been overheard! Someone is coming! All is
over! We are lost!”

“No,” said Felton; it is only the sentinel warning me that they are
about to change the guard.”

“Then run to the door, and open it yourself.”

Felton obeyed; this woman was now his whole thought, his whole soul.

He found himself face to face with a sergeant commanding a watch-patrol.

“Well, what is the matter?” asked the young lieutenant.

“You told me to open the door if I heard anyone cry out,” said the
soldier; “but you forgot to leave me the key. I heard you cry out,
without understanding what you said. I tried to open the door, but it
was locked inside; then I called the sergeant.”

“And here I am,” said the sergeant.

Felton, quite bewildered, almost mad, stood speechless.

Milady plainly perceived that it was now her turn to take part in the
scene. She ran to the table, and seizing the knife which Felton had laid
down, exclaimed, “And by what right will you prevent me from dying?”

“Great God!” exclaimed Felton, on seeing the knife glitter in her hand.

At that moment a burst of ironical laughter resounded through the
corridor. The baron, attracted by the noise, in his chamber gown, his
sword under his arm, stood in the doorway.

“Ah,” said he, “here we are, at the last act of the tragedy. You see,
Felton, the drama has gone through all the phases I named; but be easy,
no blood will flow.”

Milady perceived that all was lost unless she gave Felton an immediate
and terrible proof of her courage.

“You are mistaken, my Lord, blood will flow; and may that blood fall
back on those who cause it to flow!”

Felton uttered a cry, and rushed toward her. He was too late; Milady had
stabbed herself.

But the knife had fortunately, we ought to say skillfully, come in
contact with the steel busk, which at that period, like a cuirass,
defended the chests of women. It had glided down it, tearing the robe,
and had penetrated slantingly between the flesh and the ribs. Milady’s
robe was not the less stained with blood in a second.

Milady fell down, and seemed to be in a swoon.

Felton snatched away the knife.

“See, my Lord,” said he, in a deep, gloomy tone, “here is a woman who
was under my guard, and who has killed herself!”

“Be at ease, Felton,” said Lord de Winter. “She is not dead; demons do
not die so easily. Be tranquil, and go wait for me in my chamber.”

“But, my Lord--”

“Go, sir, I command you!”

At this injunction from his superior, Felton obeyed; but in going out,
he put the knife into his bosom.

As to Lord de Winter, he contented himself with calling the woman who
waited on Milady, and when she was come, he recommended the prisoner,
who was still fainting, to her care, and left them alone.

Meanwhile, all things considered and notwithstanding his suspicions, as
the wound might be serious, he immediately sent off a mounted man to
find a physician.




58 ESCAPE


As Lord de Winter had thought, Milady’s wound was not dangerous. So soon
as she was left alone with the woman whom the baron had summoned to her
assistance she opened her eyes.

It was, however, necessary to affect weakness and pain--not a very
difficult task for so finished an actress as Milady. Thus the poor woman
was completely the dupe of the prisoner, whom, notwithstanding her
hints, she persisted in watching all night.

But the presence of this woman did not prevent Milady from thinking.

There was no longer a doubt that Felton was convinced; Felton was hers.
If an angel appeared to that young man as an accuser of Milady, he would
take him, in the mental disposition in which he now found himself, for a
messenger sent by the devil.

Milady smiled at this thought, for Felton was now her only hope--her
only means of safety.

But Lord de Winter might suspect him; Felton himself might now be
watched!

Toward four o’clock in the morning the doctor arrived; but since the
time Milady stabbed herself, however short, the wound had closed. The
doctor could therefore measure neither the direction nor the depth of
it; he only satisfied himself by Milady’s pulse that the case was not
serious.

In the morning Milady, under the pretext that she had not slept well in
the night and wanted rest, sent away the woman who attended her.

She had one hope, which was that Felton would appear at the breakfast
hour; but Felton did not come.

Were her fears realized? Was Felton, suspected by the baron, about to
fail her at the decisive moment? She had only one day left. Lord de
Winter had announced her embarkation for the twenty-third, and it was
now the morning of the twenty-second.

Nevertheless she still waited patiently till the hour for dinner.

Although she had eaten nothing in the morning, the dinner was brought in
at its usual time. Milady then perceived, with terror, that the uniform
of the soldiers who guarded her was changed.

Then she ventured to ask what had become of Felton.

She was told that he had left the castle an hour before on horseback.
She inquired if the baron was still at the castle. The soldier replied
that he was, and that he had given orders to be informed if the prisoner
wished to speak to him.

Milady replied that she was too weak at present, and that her only
desire was to be left alone.

The soldier went out, leaving the dinner served.

Felton was sent away. The marines were removed. Felton was then
mistrusted.

This was the last blow to the prisoner.

Left alone, she arose. The bed, which she had kept from prudence and
that they might believe her seriously wounded, burned her like a bed of
fire. She cast a glance at the door; the baron had had a plank nailed
over the grating. He no doubt feared that by this opening she might
still by some diabolical means corrupt her guards.

Milady smiled with joy. She was free now to give way to her transports
without being observed. She traversed her chamber with the excitement of
a furious maniac or of a tigress shut up in an iron cage. CERTES, if the
knife had been left in her power, she would now have thought, not of
killing herself, but of killing the baron.

At six o’clock Lord de Winter came in. He was armed at all points. This
man, in whom Milady till that time had only seen a very simple
gentleman, had become an admirable jailer. He appeared to foresee all,
to divine all, to anticipate all.

A single look at Milady apprised him of all that was passing in her
mind.

“Ay!” said he, “I see; but you shall not kill me today. You have no
longer a weapon; and besides, I am on my guard. You had begun to pervert
my poor Felton. He was yielding to your infernal influence; but I will
save him. He will never see you again; all is over. Get your clothes
together. Tomorrow you will go. I had fixed the embarkation for the
twenty-fourth; but I have reflected that the more promptly the affair
takes place the more sure it will be. Tomorrow, by twelve o’clock, I
shall have the order for your exile, signed, BUCKINGHAM. If you speak a
single word to anyone before going aboard ship, my sergeant will blow
your brains out. He has orders to do so. If when on the ship you speak a
single word to anyone before the captain permits you, the captain will
have you thrown into the sea. That is agreed upon.

“AU REVOIR; then; that is all I have to say today. Tomorrow I will see
you again, to take my leave.” With these words the baron went out.
Milady had listened to all this menacing tirade with a smile of disdain
on her lips, but rage in her heart.

Supper was served. Milady felt that she stood in need of all her
strength. She did not know what might take place during this night which
approached so menacingly--for large masses of cloud rolled over the face
of the sky, and distant lightning announced a storm.

The storm broke about ten o’clock. Milady felt a consolation in seeing
nature partake of the disorder of her heart. The thunder growled in the
air like the passion and anger in her thoughts. It appeared to her that
the blast as it swept along disheveled her brow, as it bowed the
branches of the trees and bore away their leaves. She howled as the
hurricane howled; and her voice was lost in the great voice of nature,
which also seemed to groan with despair.

All at once she heard a tap at her window, and by the help of a flash of
lightning she saw the face of a man appear behind the bars.

She ran to the window and opened it.

“Felton!” cried she. “I am saved.”

“Yes,” said Felton; “but silence, silence! I must have time to file
through these bars. Only take care that I am not seen through the
wicket.”

“Oh, it is a proof that the Lord is on our side, Felton,” replied
Milady. “They have closed up the grating with a board.”

“That is well; God has made them senseless,” said Felton.

“But what must I do?” asked Milady.

“Nothing, nothing, only shut the window. Go to bed, or at least lie down
in your clothes. As soon as I have done I will knock on one of the panes
of glass. But will you be able to follow me?”

“Oh, yes!”

“Your wound?”

“Gives me pain, but will not prevent my walking.”

“Be ready, then, at the first signal.”

Milady shut the window, extinguished the lamp, and went, as Felton had
desired her, to lie down on the bed. Amid the moaning of the storm she
heard the grinding of the file upon the bars, and by the light of every
flash she perceived the shadow of Felton through the panes.

She passed an hour without breathing, panting, with a cold sweat upon
her brow, and her heart oppressed by frightful agony at every movement
she heard in the corridor.

There are hours which last a year.

At the expiration of an hour, Felton tapped again.

Milady sprang out of bed and opened the window. Two bars removed formed
an opening for a man to pass through.

“Are you ready?” asked Felton.

“Yes. Must I take anything with me?”

“Money, if you have any.”

“Yes; fortunately they have left me all I had.”

“So much the better, for I have expended all mine in chartering a
vessel.”

“Here!” said Milady, placing a bag full of louis in Felton’s hands.

Felton took the bag and threw it to the foot of the wall.

“Now,” said he, “will you come?”

“I am ready.”

Milady mounted upon a chair and passed the upper part of her body
through the window. She saw the young officer suspended over the abyss
by a ladder of ropes. For the first time an emotion of terror reminded
her that she was a woman.

The dark space frightened her.

“I expected this,” said Felton.

“It’s nothing, it’s nothing!” said Milady. “I will descend with my eyes
shut.”

“Have you confidence in me?” said Felton.

“You ask that?”

“Put your two hands together. Cross them; that’s right!”

Felton tied her two wrists together with his handkerchief, and then with
a cord over the handkerchief.

“What are you doing?” asked Milady, with surprise.

“Pass your arms around my neck, and fear nothing.”

“But I shall make you lose your balance, and we shall both be dashed to
pieces.”

“Don’t be afraid. I am a sailor.”

Not a second was to be lost. Milady passed her two arms round Felton’s
neck, and let herself slip out of the window. Felton began to descend
the ladder slowly, step by step. Despite the weight of two bodies, the
blast of the hurricane shook them in the air.

All at once Felton stopped.

“What is the matter?” asked Milady.

“Silence,” said Felton, “I hear footsteps.”

“We are discovered!”

There was a silence of several seconds.

“No,” said Felton, “it is nothing.”

“But what, then, is the noise?”

“That of the patrol going their rounds.”

“Where is their road?”

“Just under us.”

“They will discover us!”

“No, if it does not lighten.”

“But they will run against the bottom of the ladder.”

“Fortunately it is too short by six feet.”

“Here they are! My God!”

“Silence!”

Both remained suspended, motionless and breathless, within twenty paces
of the ground, while the patrol passed beneath them laughing and
talking. This was a terrible moment for the fugitives.

The patrol passed. The noise of their retreating footsteps and the
murmur of their voices soon died away.

“Now,” said Felton, “we are safe.”

Milady breathed a deep sigh and fainted.

Felton continued to descend. Near the bottom of the ladder, when he
found no more support for his feet, he clung with his hands; at length,
arrived at the last step, he let himself hang by the strength of his
wrists, and touched the ground. He stooped down, picked up the bag of
money, and placed it between his teeth. Then he took Milady in his arms,
and set off briskly in the direction opposite to that which the patrol
had taken. He soon left the pathway of the patrol, descended across the
rocks, and when arrived on the edge of the sea, whistled.

A similar signal replied to him; and five minutes after, a boat
appeared, rowed by four men.

The boat approached as near as it could to the shore; but there was not
depth enough of water for it to touch land. Felton walked into the sea
up to his middle, being unwilling to trust his precious burden to
anybody.

Fortunately the storm began to subside, but still the sea was disturbed.
The little boat bounded over the waves like a nut-shell.

“To the sloop,” said Felton, “and row quickly.”

The four men bent to their oars, but the sea was too high to let them
get much hold of it.

However, they left the castle behind; that was the principal thing. The
night was extremely dark. It was almost impossible to see the shore from
the boat; they would therefore be less likely to see the boat from the
shore.

A black point floated on the sea. That was the sloop. While the boat was
advancing with all the speed its four rowers could give it, Felton
untied the cord and then the handkerchief which bound Milady’s hands
together. When her hands were loosed he took some sea water and
sprinkled it over her face.

Milady breathed a sigh, and opened her eyes.

“Where am I?” said she.

“Saved!” replied the young officer.

“Oh, saved, saved!” cried she. “Yes, there is the sky; here is the sea!
The air I breathe is the air of liberty! Ah, thanks, Felton, thanks!”

The young man pressed her to his heart.

“But what is the matter with my hands!” asked Milady; “it seems as if my
wrists had been crushed in a vice.”

Milady held out her arms; her wrists were bruised.

“Alas!” said Felton, looking at those beautiful hands, and shaking his
head sorrowfully.

“Oh, it’s nothing, nothing!” cried Milady. “I remember now.”

Milady looked around her, as if in search of something.

“It is there,” said Felton, touching the bag of money with his foot.

They drew near to the sloop. A sailor on watch hailed the boat; the boat
replied.

“What vessel is that?” asked Milady.

“The one I have hired for you.”

“Where will it take me?”

“Where you please, after you have put me on shore at Portsmouth.”

“What are you going to do at Portsmouth?” asked Milady.

“Accomplish the orders of Lord de Winter,” said Felton, with a gloomy
smile.

“What orders?” asked Milady.

“You do not understand?” asked Felton.

“No; explain yourself, I beg.”

“As he mistrusted me, he determined to guard you himself, and sent me in
his place to get Buckingham to sign the order for your transportation.”

“But if he mistrusted you, how could he confide such an order to you?”

“How could I know what I was the bearer of?”

“That’s true! And you are going to Portsmouth?”

“I have no time to lose. Tomorrow is the twenty-third, and Buckingham
sets sail tomorrow with his fleet.”

“He sets sail tomorrow! Where for?”

“For La Rochelle.”

“He need not sail!” cried Milady, forgetting her usual presence of mind.

“Be satisfied,” replied Felton; “he will not sail.”

Milady started with joy. She could read to the depths of the heart of
this young man; the death of Buckingham was written there at full
length.

“Felton,” cried she, “you are as great as Judas Maccabeus! If you die, I
will die with you; that is all I can say to you.”

“Silence!” cried Felton; “we are here.”

In fact, they touched the sloop.

Felton mounted the ladder first, and gave his hand to Milady, while the
sailors supported her, for the sea was still much agitated.

An instant after they were on the deck.

“Captain,” said Felton, “this is the person of whom I spoke to you, and
whom you must convey safe and sound to France.”

“For a thousand pistoles,” said the captain.

“I have paid you five hundred of them.”

“That’s correct,” said the captain.

“And here are the other five hundred,” replied Milady, placing her hand
upon the bag of gold.

“No,” said the captain, “I make but one bargain; and I have agreed with
this young man that the other five hundred shall not be due to me till
we arrive at Boulogne.”

“And shall we arrive there?”

“Safe and sound, as true as my name’s Jack Butler.”

“Well,” said Milady, “if you keep your word, instead of five hundred, I
will give you a thousand pistoles.”

“Hurrah for you, then, my beautiful lady,” cried the captain; “and may
God often send me such passengers as your Ladyship!”

“Meanwhile,” said Felton, “convey me to the little bay of--; you know it
was agreed you should put in there.”

The captain replied by ordering the necessary maneuvers, and toward
seven o’clock in the morning the little vessel cast anchor in the bay
that had been named.

During this passage, Felton related everything to Milady--how, instead
of going to London, he had chartered the little vessel; how he had
returned; how he had scaled the wall by fastening cramps in the
interstices of the stones, as he ascended, to give him foothold; and
how, when he had reached the bars, he fastened his ladder. Milady knew
the rest.

On her side, Milady tried to encourage Felton in his project; but at the
first words which issued from her mouth, she plainly saw that the young
fanatic stood more in need of being moderated than urged.

It was agreed that Milady should wait for Felton till ten o’clock; if he
did not return by ten o’clock she was to sail.

In that case, and supposing he was at liberty, he was to rejoin her in
France, at the convent of the Carmelites at Bethune.




59 WHAT TOOK PLACE AT PORTSMOUTH AUGUST 23, 1628


Felton took leave of Milady as a brother about to go for a mere walk
takes leave of his sister, kissing her hand.

His whole body appeared in its ordinary state of calmness, only an
unusual fire beamed from his eyes, like the effects of a fever; his brow
was more pale than it generally was; his teeth were clenched, and his
speech had a short dry accent which indicated that something dark was at
work within him.

As long as he remained in the boat which conveyed him to land, he kept
his face toward Milady, who, standing on the deck, followed him with her
eyes. Both were free from the fear of pursuit; nobody ever came into
Milady’s apartment before nine o’clock, and it would require three hours
to go from the castle to London.

Felton jumped onshore, climbed the little ascent which led to the top of
the cliff, saluted Milady a last time, and took his course toward the
city.

At the end of a hundred paces, the ground began to decline, and he could
only see the mast of the sloop.

He immediately ran in the direction of Portsmouth, which he saw at
nearly half a league before him, standing out in the haze of the
morning, with its houses and towers.

Beyond Portsmouth the sea was covered with vessels whose masts, like a
forest of poplars despoiled by the winter, bent with each breath of the
wind.

Felton, in his rapid walk, reviewed in his mind all the accusations
against the favorite of James I and Charles I, furnished by two years of
premature meditation and a long sojourn among the Puritans.

When he compared the public crimes of this minister--startling crimes,
European crimes, if so we may say--with the private and unknown crimes
with which Milady had charged him, Felton found that the more culpable
of the two men which formed the character of Buckingham was the one of
whom the public knew not the life. This was because his love, so
strange, so new, and so ardent, made him view the infamous and imaginary
accusations of Milady de Winter as, through a magnifying glass, one
views as frightful monsters atoms in reality imperceptible by the side
of an ant.

The rapidity of his walk heated his blood still more; the idea that he
left behind him, exposed to a frightful vengeance, the woman he loved,
or rather whom he adored as a saint, the emotion he had experienced,
present fatigue--all together exalted his mind above human feeling.

He entered Portsmouth about eight o’clock in the morning. The whole
population was on foot; drums were beating in the streets and in the
port; the troops about to embark were marching toward the sea.

Felton arrived at the palace of the Admiralty, covered with dust, and
streaming with perspiration. His countenance, usually so pale, was
purple with heat and passion. The sentinel wanted to repulse him; but
Felton called to the officer of the post, and drawing from his pocket
the letter of which he was the bearer, he said, “A pressing message from
Lord de Winter.”

At the name of Lord de Winter, who was known to be one of his Grace’s
most intimate friends, the officer of the post gave orders to let Felton
pass, who, besides, wore the uniform of a naval officer.

Felton darted into the palace.

At the moment he entered the vestibule, another man was entering
likewise, dusty, out of breath, leaving at the gate a post horse, which,
on reaching the palace, tumbled on his foreknees.

Felton and he addressed Patrick, the duke’s confidential lackey, at the
same moment. Felton named Lord de Winter; the unknown would not name
anybody, and pretended that it was to the duke alone he would make
himself known. Each was anxious to gain admission before the other.

Patrick, who knew Lord de Winter was in affairs of the service, and in
relations of friendship with the duke, gave the preference to the one
who came in his name. The other was forced to wait, and it was easily to
be seen how he cursed the delay.

The valet led Felton through a large hall in which waited the deputies
from La Rochelle, headed by the Prince de Soubise, and introduced him
into a closet where Buckingham, just out of the bath, was finishing his
toilet, upon which, as at all times, he bestowed extraordinary
attention.

“Lieutenant Felton, from Lord de Winter,” said Patrick.

“From Lord de Winter!” repeated Buckingham; “let him come in.”

Felton entered. At that moment Buckingham was throwing upon a couch a
rich toilet robe, worked with gold, in order to put on a blue velvet
doublet embroidered with pearls.

“Why didn’t the baron come himself?” demanded Buckingham. “I expected
him this morning.”

“He desired me to tell your Grace,” replied Felton, “that he very much
regretted not having that honor, but that he was prevented by the guard
he is obliged to keep at the castle.”

“Yes, I know that,” said Buckingham; “he has a prisoner.”

“It is of that prisoner that I wish to speak to your Grace,” replied
Felton.

“Well, then, speak!”

“That which I have to say of her can only be heard by yourself, my
Lord!”

“Leave us, Patrick,” said Buckingham; “but remain within sound of the
bell. I shall call you presently.”

Patrick went out.

“We are alone, sir,” said Buckingham; “speak!”

“My Lord,” said Felton, “the Baron de Winter wrote to you the other day
to request you to sign an order of embarkation relative to a young woman
named Charlotte Backson.”

“Yes, sir; and I answered him, to bring or send me that order and I
would sign it.”

“Here it is, my Lord.”

“Give it to me,” said the duke.

And taking it from Felton, he cast a rapid glance over the paper, and
perceiving that it was the one that had been mentioned to him, he placed
it on the table, took a pen, and prepared to sign it.

“Pardon, my Lord,” said Felton, stopping the duke; “but does your Grace
know that the name of Charlotte Backson is not the true name of this
young woman?”

“Yes, sir, I know it,” replied the duke, dipping the quill in the ink.

“Then your Grace knows her real name?” asked Felton, in a sharp tone.

“I know it”; and the duke put the quill to the paper. Felton grew pale.

“And knowing that real name, my Lord,” replied Felton, “will you sign it
all the same?”

“Doubtless,” said Buckingham, “and rather twice than once.”

“I cannot believe,” continued Felton, in a voice that became more sharp
and rough, “that your Grace knows that it is to Milady de Winter this
relates.”

“I know it perfectly, although I am astonished that you know it.”

“And will your Grace sign that order without remorse?”

Buckingham looked at the young man haughtily.

“Do you know, sir, that you are asking me very strange questions, and
that I am very foolish to answer them?”

“Reply to them, my Lord,” said Felton; “the circumstances are more
serious than you perhaps believe.”

Buckingham reflected that the young man, coming from Lord de Winter,
undoubtedly spoke in his name, and softened.

“Without remorse,” said he. “The baron knows, as well as myself, that
Milady de Winter is a very guilty woman, and it is treating her very
favorably to commute her punishment to transportation.” The duke put his
pen to the paper.

“You will not sign that order, my Lord!” said Felton, making a step
toward the duke.

“I will not sign this order! And why not?”

“Because you will look into yourself, and you will do justice to the
lady.”

“I should do her justice by sending her to Tyburn,” said Buckingham.
“This lady is infamous.”

“My Lord, Milady de Winter is an angel; you know that she is, and I
demand her liberty of you.”

“Bah! Are you mad, to talk to me thus?” said Buckingham.

“My Lord, excuse me! I speak as I can; I restrain myself. But, my Lord,
think of what you’re about to do, and beware of going too far!”

“What do you say? God pardon me!” cried Buckingham, “I really think he
threatens me!”

“No, my Lord, I still plead. And I say to you: one drop of water
suffices to make the full vase overflow; one slight fault may draw down
punishment upon the head spared, despite many crimes.”

“Mr. Felton,” said Buckingham, “you will withdraw, and place yourself at
once under arrest.”

“You will hear me to the end, my Lord. You have seduced this young girl;
you have outraged, defiled her. Repair your crimes toward her; let her
go free, and I will exact nothing else from you.”

“You will exact!” said Buckingham, looking at Felton with astonishment,
and dwelling upon each syllable of the three words as he pronounced
them.

“My Lord,” continued Felton, becoming more excited as he spoke, “my
Lord, beware! All England is tired of your iniquities; my Lord, you have
abused the royal power, which you have almost usurped; my Lord, you are
held in horror by God and men. God will punish you hereafter, but I will
punish you here!”

“Ah, this is too much!” cried Buckingham, making a step toward the door.

Felton barred his passage.

“I ask it humbly of you, my Lord,” said he; “sign the order for the
liberation of Milady de Winter. Remember that she is a woman whom you
have dishonored.”

“Withdraw, sir,” said Buckingham, “or I will call my attendant, and have
you placed in irons.”

“You shall not call,” said Felton, throwing himself between the duke and
the bell placed on a stand encrusted with silver. “Beware, my Lord, you
are in the hands of God!”

“In the hands of the devil, you mean!” cried Buckingham, raising his
voice so as to attract the notice of his people, without absolutely
shouting.

“Sign, my Lord; sign the liberation of Milady de Winter,” said Felton,
holding out a paper to the duke.

“By force? You are joking! Holloa, Patrick!”

“Sign, my Lord!”

“Never.”

“Never?”

“Help!” shouted the duke; and at the same time he sprang toward his
sword.

But Felton did not give him time to draw it. He held the knife with
which Milady had stabbed herself, open in his bosom; at one bound he was
upon the duke.

At that moment Patrick entered the room, crying, “A letter from France,
my Lord.”

“From France!” cried Buckingham, forgetting everything in thinking from
whom that letter came.

Felton took advantage of this moment, and plunged the knife into his
side up to the handle.

“Ah, traitor,” cried Buckingham, “you have killed me!”

“Murder!” screamed Patrick.

Felton cast his eyes round for means of escape, and seeing the door
free, he rushed into the next chamber, in which, as we have said, the
deputies from La Rochelle were waiting, crossed it as quickly as
possible, and rushed toward the staircase; but upon the first step he
met Lord de Winter, who, seeing him pale, confused, livid, and stained
with blood both on his hands and face, seized him by the throat, crying,
“I knew it! I guessed it! But too late by a minute, unfortunate,
unfortunate that I am!”

Felton made no resistance. Lord de Winter placed him in the hands of the
guards, who led him, while awaiting further orders, to a little terrace
commanding the sea; and then the baron hastened to the duke’s chamber.

At the cry uttered by the duke and the scream of Patrick, the man whom
Felton had met in the antechamber rushed into the chamber.

He found the duke reclining upon a sofa, with his hand pressed upon the
wound.

“Laporte,” said the duke, in a dying voice, “Laporte, do you come from
her?”

“Yes, monseigneur,” replied the faithful cloak bearer of Anne of
Austria, “but too late, perhaps.”

“Silence, Laporte, you may be overheard. Patrick, let no one enter. Oh,
I cannot tell what she says to me! My God, I am dying!”

And the duke swooned.

Meanwhile, Lord de Winter, the deputies, the leaders of the expedition,
the officers of Buckingham’s household, had all made their way into the
chamber. Cries of despair resounded on all sides. The news, which filled
the palace with tears and groans, soon became known, and spread itself
throughout the city.

The report of a cannon announced that something new and unexpected had
taken place.

Lord de Winter tore his hair.

“Too late by a minute!” cried he, “too late by a minute! Oh, my God, my
God! what a misfortune!”

He had been informed at seven o’clock in the morning that a rope ladder
floated from one of the windows of the castle; he had hastened to
Milady’s chamber, had found it empty, the window open, and the bars
filed, had remembered the verbal caution d’Artagnan had transmitted to
him by his messenger, had trembled for the duke, and running to the
stable without taking time to have a horse saddled, had jumped upon the
first he found, had galloped off like the wind, had alighted below in
the courtyard, had ascended the stairs precipitately, and on the top
step, as we have said, had encountered Felton.

The duke, however, was not dead. He recovered a little, reopened his
eyes, and hope revived in all hearts.

“Gentlemen,” said he, “leave me alone with Patrick and Laporte--ah, is
that you, de Winter? You sent me a strange madman this morning! See the
state in which he has put me.”

“Oh, my Lord!” cried the baron, “I shall never console myself.”

“And you would be quite wrong, my dear de Winter,” said Buckingham,
holding out his hand to him. “I do not know the man who deserves being
regretted during the whole life of another man; but leave us, I pray
you.”

The baron went out sobbing.

There only remained in the closet of the wounded duke Laporte and
Patrick. A physician was sought for, but none was yet found.

“You will live, my Lord, you will live!” repeated the faithful servant
of Anne of Austria, on his knees before the duke’s sofa.

“What has she written to me?” said Buckingham, feebly, streaming with
blood, and suppressing his agony to speak of her he loved, “what has she
written to me? Read me her letter.”

“Oh, my Lord!” said Laporte.

“Obey, Laporte, do you not see I have no time to lose?”

Laporte broke the seal, and placed the paper before the eyes of the
duke; but Buckingham in vain tried to make out the writing.

“Read!” said he, “read! I cannot see. Read, then! For soon, perhaps, I
shall not hear, and I shall die without knowing what she has written to
me.”

Laporte made no further objection, and read:

“My Lord, By that which, since I have known you, have suffered by you
and for you, I conjure you, if you have any care for my repose, to
countermand those great armaments which you are preparing against
France, to put an end to a war of which it is publicly said religion is
the ostensible cause, and of which, it is generally whispered, your love
for me is the concealed cause. This war may not only bring great
catastrophes upon England and France, but misfortune upon you, my Lord,
for which I should never console myself.

“Be careful of your life, which is menaced, and which will be dear to me
from the moment I am not obliged to see an enemy in you.

“Your affectionate

“ANNE”

Buckingham collected all his remaining strength to listen to the reading
of the letter; then, when it was ended, as if he had met with a bitter
disappointment, he asked, “Have you nothing else to say to me by the
living voice, Laporte?”

“The queen charged me to tell you to watch over yourself, for she had
advice that your assassination would be attempted.”

“And is that all--is that all?” replied Buckingham, impatiently.

“She likewise charged me to tell you that she still loved you.”

“Ah,” said Buckingham, “God be praised! My death, then, will not be to
her as the death of a stranger!”

Laporte burst into tears.

“Patrick,” said the duke, “bring me the casket in which the diamond
studs were kept.”

Patrick brought the object desired, which Laporte recognized as having
belonged to the queen.

“Now the scent bag of white satin, on which her cipher is embroidered in
pearls.”

Patrick again obeyed.

“Here, Laporte,” said Buckingham, “these are the only tokens I ever
received from her--this silver casket and these two letters. You will
restore them to her Majesty; and as a last memorial”--he looked round
for some valuable object--“you will add--”

He still sought; but his eyes, darkened by death, encountered only the
knife which had fallen from the hand of Felton, still smoking with the
blood spread over its blade.

“And you will add to them this knife,” said the duke, pressing the hand
of Laporte. He had just strength enough to place the scent bag at the
bottom of the silver casket, and to let the knife fall into it, making a
sign to Laporte that he was no longer able to speak; then, in a last
convulsion, which this time he had not the power to combat, he slipped
from the sofa to the floor.

Patrick uttered a loud cry.

Buckingham tried to smile a last time; but death checked his thought,
which remained engraved on his brow like a last kiss of love.

At this moment the duke’s surgeon arrived, quite terrified; he was
already on board the admiral’s ship, where they had been obliged to seek
him.

He approached the duke, took his hand, held it for an instant in his
own, and letting it fall, “All is useless,” said he, “he is dead.”

“Dead, dead!” cried Patrick.

At this cry all the crowd re-entered the apartment, and throughout the
palace and town there was nothing but consternation and tumult.

As soon as Lord de Winter saw Buckingham was dead, he ran to Felton,
whom the soldiers still guarded on the terrace of the palace.

“Wretch!” said he to the young man, who since the death of Buckingham
had regained that coolness and self-possession which never after
abandoned him, “wretch! what have you done?”

“I have avenged myself!” said he.

“Avenged yourself,” said the baron. “Rather say that you have served as
an instrument to that accursed woman; but I swear to you that this crime
shall be her last.”

“I don’t know what you mean,” replied Felton, quietly, “and I am
ignorant of whom you are speaking, my Lord. I killed the Duke of
Buckingham because he twice refused you yourself to appoint me captain;
I have punished him for his injustice, that is all.”

De Winter, stupefied, looked on while the soldiers bound Felton, and
could not tell what to think of such insensibility.

One thing alone, however, threw a shade over the pallid brow of Felton.
At every noise he heard, the simple Puritan fancied he recognized the
step and voice of Milady coming to throw herself into his arms, to
accuse herself, and die with him.

All at once he started. His eyes became fixed upon a point of the sea,
commanded by the terrace where he was. With the eagle glance of a sailor
he had recognized there, where another would have seen only a gull
hovering over the waves, the sail of a sloop which was directed toward
the coast of France.

He grew deadly pale, placed his hand upon his heart, which was breaking,
and at once perceived all the treachery.

“One last favor, my Lord!” said he to the baron.

“What?” asked his Lordship.

“What o’clock is it?”

The baron drew out his watch. “It wants ten minutes to nine,” said he.

Milady had hastened her departure by an hour and a half. As soon as she
heard the cannon which announced the fatal event, she had ordered the
anchor to be weighed. The vessel was making way under a blue sky, at
great distance from the coast.

“God has so willed it!” said he, with the resignation of a fanatic; but
without, however, being able to take his eyes from that ship, on board
of which he doubtless fancied he could distinguish the white outline of
her to whom he had sacrificed his life.

De Winter followed his look, observed his feelings, and guessed all.

“Be punished ALONE, for the first, miserable man!” said Lord de Winter
to Felton, who was being dragged away with his eyes turned toward the
sea; “but I swear to you by the memory of my brother whom I have loved
so much that your accomplice is not saved.”

Felton lowered his head without pronouncing a syllable.

As to Lord de Winter, he descended the stairs rapidly, and went straight
to the port.




60 IN FRANCE


The first fear of the King of England, Charles I, on learning of the
death of the duke, was that such terrible news might discourage the
Rochellais; he tried, says Richelieu in his Memoirs, to conceal it from
them as long as possible, closing all the ports of his kingdom, and
carefully keeping watch that no vessel should sail until the army which
Buckingham was getting together had gone, taking upon himself, in
default of Buckingham, to superintend the departure.

He carried the strictness of this order so far as to detain in England
the ambassadors of Denmark, who had taken their leave, and the regular
ambassador of Holland, who was to take back to the port of Flushing the
Indian merchantmen of which Charles I had made restitution to the United
Provinces.

But as he did not think of giving this order till five hours after the
event--that is to say, till two o’clock in the afternoon--two vessels
had already left the port, the one bearing, as we know, Milady, who,
already anticipating the event, was further confirmed in that belief by
seeing the black flag flying at the masthead of the admiral’s ship.

As to the second vessel, we will tell hereafter whom it carried, and how
it set sail.

During this time nothing new occurred in the camp at La Rochelle; only
the king, who was bored, as always, but perhaps a little more so in camp
than elsewhere, resolved to go incognito and spend the festival of St.
Louis at St. Germain, and asked the cardinal to order him an escort of
only twenty Musketeers. The cardinal, who sometimes became weary of the
king, granted this leave of absence with great pleasure to his royal
lieutenant, who promised to return about the fifteenth of September.

M de Treville, being informed of this by his Eminence, packed his
portmanteau; and as without knowing the cause he knew the great desire
and even imperative need which his friends had of returning to Paris, it
goes without saying that he fixed upon them to form part of the escort.

The four young men heard the news a quarter of an hour after M. de
Treville, for they were the first to whom he communicated it. It was
then that d’Artagnan appreciated the favor the cardinal had conferred
upon him in making him at last enter the Musketeers--for without that
circumstance he would have been forced to remain in the camp while his
companions left it.

It goes without saying that this impatience to return toward Paris had
for a cause the danger which Mme. Bonacieux would run of meeting at the
convent of Bethune with Milady, her mortal enemy. Aramis therefore had
written immediately to Marie Michon, the seamstress at Tours who had
such fine acquaintances, to obtain from the queen authority for Mme.
Bonacieux to leave the convent, and to retire either into Lorraine or
Belgium. They had not long to wait for an answer. Eight or ten days
afterward Aramis received the following letter:

“My Dear Cousin,

“Here is the authorization from my sister to withdraw our little servant
from the convent of Bethune, the air of which you think is bad for her.
My sister sends you this authorization with great pleasure, for she is
very partial to the little girl, to whom she intends to be more
serviceable hereafter.

“I salute you,

“MARIE MICHON”

To this letter was added an order, conceived in these terms:

“At the Louvre, August 10, 1628

“The superior of the convent of Bethune will place in the hands of the
person who shall present this note to her the novice who entered the
convent upon my recommendation and under my patronage.

“ANNE”

It may be easily imagined how the relationship between Aramis and a
seamstress who called the queen her sister amused the young men; but
Aramis, after having blushed two or three times up to the whites of his
eyes at the gross pleasantry of Porthos, begged his friends not to
revert to the subject again, declaring that if a single word more was
said to him about it, he would never again implore his cousins to
interfere in such affairs.

There was no further question, therefore, about Marie Michon among the
four Musketeers, who besides had what they wanted: that was, the order
to withdraw Mme. Bonacieux from the convent of the Carmelites of
Bethune. It was true that this order would not be of great use to them
while they were in camp at La Rochelle; that is to say, at the other end
of France. Therefore d’Artagnan was going to ask leave of absence of M.
de Treville, confiding to him candidly the importance of his departure,
when the news was transmitted to him as well as to his three friends
that the king was about to set out for Paris with an escort of twenty
Musketeers, and that they formed part of the escort.

Their joy was great. The lackeys were sent on before with the baggage,
and they set out on the morning of the sixteenth.

The cardinal accompanied his Majesty from Surgeres to Mauzes; and there
the king and his minister took leave of each other with great
demonstrations of friendship.

The king, however, who sought distraction, while traveling as fast as
possible--for he was anxious to be in Paris by the twenty-third--stopped
from time to time to fly the magpie, a pastime for which the taste had
been formerly inspired in him by de Luynes, and for which he had always
preserved a great predilection. Out of the twenty Musketeers sixteen,
when this took place, rejoiced greatly at this relaxation; but the other
four cursed it heartily. D’Artagnan, in particular, had a perpetual
buzzing in his ears, which Porthos explained thus: “A very great lady
has told me that this means that somebody is talking of you somewhere.”

At length the escort passed through Paris on the twenty-third, in the
night. The king thanked M. de Treville, and permitted him to distribute
furloughs for four days, on condition that the favored parties should
not appear in any public place, under penalty of the Bastille.

The first four furloughs granted, as may be imagined, were to our four
friends. Still further, Athos obtained of M. de Treville six days
instead of four, and introduced into these six days two more nights--for
they set out on the twenty-fourth at five o’clock in the evening, and as
a further kindness M. de Treville post-dated the leave to the morning of
the twenty-fifth.

“Good Lord!” said d’Artagnan, who, as we have often said, never stumbled
at anything. “It appears to me that we are making a great trouble of a
very simple thing. In two days, and by using up two or three horses
(that’s nothing; I have plenty of money), I am at Bethune. I present my
letter from the queen to the superior, and I bring back the dear
treasure I go to seek--not into Lorraine, not into Belgium, but to
Paris, where she will be much better concealed, particularly while the
cardinal is at La Rochelle. Well, once returned from the country, half
by the protection of her cousin, half through what we have personally
done for her, we shall obtain from the queen what we desire. Remain,
then, where you are, and do not exhaust yourselves with useless fatigue.
Myself and Planchet are all that such a simple expedition requires.”

To this Athos replied quietly: “We also have money left--for I have not
yet drunk all my share of the diamond, and Porthos and Aramis have not
eaten all theirs. We can therefore use up four horses as well as one.
But consider, d’Artagnan,” added he, in a tone so solemn that it made
the young man shudder, “consider that Bethune is a city where the
cardinal has given rendezvous to a woman who, wherever she goes, brings
misery with her. If you had only to deal with four men, d’Artagnan, I
would allow you to go alone. You have to do with that woman! We four
will go; and I hope to God that with our four lackeys we may be in
sufficient number.”

“You terrify me, Athos!” cried d’Artagnan. “My God! what do you fear?”

“Everything!” replied Athos.

D’Artagnan examined the countenances of his companions, which, like that
of Athos, wore an impression of deep anxiety; and they continued their
route as fast as their horses could carry them, but without adding
another word.

On the evening of the twenty-fifth, as they were entering Arras, and as
d’Artagnan was dismounting at the inn of the Golden Harrow to drink a
glass of wine, a horseman came out of the post yard, where he had just
had a relay, started off at a gallop, and with a fresh horse took the
road to Paris. At the moment he passed through the gateway into the
street, the wind blew open the cloak in which he was wrapped, although
it was in the month of August, and lifted his hat, which the traveler
seized with his hand the moment it had left his head, pulling it eagerly
over his eyes.

D’Artagnan, who had his eyes fixed upon this man, became very pale, and
let his glass fall.

“What is the matter, monsieur?” said Planchet. “Oh, come, gentlemen, my
master is ill!”

The three friends hastened toward d’Artagnan, who, instead of being ill,
ran toward his horse. They stopped him at the door.

“Well, where the devil are you going now?” cried Athos.

“It is he!” cried d’Artagnan, pale with anger, and with the sweat on his
brow, “it is he! let me overtake him!”

“He? What he?” asked Athos.

“He, that man!”

“What man?”

“That cursed man, my evil genius, whom I have always met with when
threatened by some misfortune, he who accompanied that horrible woman
when I met her for the first time, he whom I was seeking when I offended
our Athos, he whom I saw on the very morning Madame Bonacieux was
abducted. I have seen him; that is he! I recognized him when the wind
blew upon his cloak.”

“The devil!” said Athos, musingly.

“To saddle, gentlemen! to saddle! Let us pursue him, and we shall
overtake him!”

“My dear friend,” said Aramis, “remember that he goes in an opposite
direction from that in which we are going, that he has a fresh horse,
and ours are fatigued, so that we shall disable our own horses without
even a chance of overtaking him. Let the man go, d’Artagnan; let us save
the woman.”

“Monsieur, monsieur!” cried a hostler, running out and looking after the
stranger, “monsieur, here is a paper which dropped out of your hat! Eh,
monsieur, eh!”

“Friend,” said d’Artagnan, “a half-pistole for that paper!”

“My faith, monsieur, with great pleasure! Here it is!”

The hostler, enchanted with the good day’s work he had done, returned to
the yard. D’Artagnan unfolded the paper.

“Well?” eagerly demanded all his three friends.

“Nothing but one word!” said d’Artagnan.

“Yes,” said Aramis, “but that one word is the name of some town or
village.”

“Armentieres,” read Porthos; “Armentieres? I don’t know such a place.”

“And that name of a town or village is written in her hand!” cried
Athos.

“Come on, come on!” said d’Artagnan; “let us keep that paper carefully,
perhaps I have not thrown away my half-pistole. To horse, my friends, to
horse!”

And the four friends flew at a gallop along the road to Bethune.




61 THE CARMELITE CONVENT AT BETHUNE


Great criminals bear about them a kind of predestination which makes
them surmount all obstacles, which makes them escape all dangers, up to
the moment which a wearied Providence has marked as the rock of their
impious fortunes.

It was thus with Milady. She escaped the cruisers of both nations, and
arrived at Boulogne without accident.

When landing at Portsmouth, Milady was an Englishwoman whom the
persecutions of the French drove from La Rochelle; when landing at
Boulogne, after a two days’ passage, she passed for a Frenchwoman whom
the English persecuted at Portsmouth out of their hatred for France.

Milady had, likewise, the best of passports--her beauty, her noble
appearance, and the liberality with which she distributed her pistoles.
Freed from the usual formalities by the affable smile and gallant
manners of an old governor of the port, who kissed her hand, she only
remained long enough at Boulogne to put into the post a letter,
conceived in the following terms:

“To his Eminence Monseigneur the Cardinal Richelieu, in his camp before
La Rochelle.

“Monseigneur,

Let your Eminence be reassured. His Grace the Duke of Buckingham WILL
NOT SET OUT for France.

“MILADY DE ----

“BOULOGNE, evening of the twenty-fifth.

“P.S.--According to the desire of your Eminence, I report to the convent
of the Carmelites at Bethune, where I will await your orders.”

Accordingly, that same evening Milady commenced her journey. Night
overtook her; she stopped, and slept at an inn. At five o’clock the next
morning she again proceeded, and in three hours after entered Bethune.
She inquired for the convent of the Carmelites, and went thither
immediately.

The superior met her; Milady showed her the cardinal’s order. The abbess
assigned her a chamber, and had breakfast served.

All the past was effaced from the eyes of this woman; and her looks,
fixed on the future, beheld nothing but the high fortunes reserved for
her by the cardinal, whom she had so successfully served without his
name being in any way mixed up with the sanguinary affair. The ever-new
passions which consumed her gave to her life the appearance of those
clouds which float in the heavens, reflecting sometimes azure, sometimes
fire, sometimes the opaque blackness of the tempest, and which leave no
traces upon the earth behind them but devastation and death.

After breakfast, the abbess came to pay her a visit. There is very
little amusement in the cloister, and the good superior was eager to
make the acquaintance of her new boarder.

Milady wished to please the abbess. This was a very easy matter for a
woman so really superior as she was. She tried to be agreeable, and she
was charming, winning the good superior by her varied conversation and
by the graces of her whole personality.

The abbess, who was the daughter of a noble house, took particular
delight in stories of the court, which so seldom travel to the
extremities of the kingdom, and which, above all, have so much
difficulty in penetrating the walls of convents, at whose threshold the
noise of the world dies away.

Milady, on the contrary, was quite conversant with all aristocratic
intrigues, amid which she had constantly lived for five or six years.
She made it her business, therefore, to amuse the good abbess with the
worldly practices of the court of France, mixed with the eccentric
pursuits of the king; she made for her the scandalous chronicle of the
lords and ladies of the court, whom the abbess knew perfectly by name,
touched lightly on the amours of the queen and the Duke of Buckingham,
talking a great deal to induce her auditor to talk a little.

But the abbess contented herself with listening and smiling without
replying a word. Milady, however, saw that this sort of narrative amused
her very much, and kept at it; only she now let her conversation drift
toward the cardinal.

But she was greatly embarrassed. She did not know whether the abbess was
a royalist or a cardinalist; she therefore confined herself to a prudent
middle course. But the abbess, on her part, maintained a reserve still
more prudent, contenting herself with making a profound inclination of
the head every time the fair traveler pronounced the name of his
Eminence.

Milady began to think she should soon grow weary of a convent life; she
resolved, then, to risk something in order that she might know how to
act afterward. Desirous of seeing how far the discretion of the good
abbess would go, she began to tell a story, obscure at first, but very
circumstantial afterward, about the cardinal, relating the amours of the
minister with Mme. d’Aiguillon, Marion de Lorme, and several other gay
women.

The abbess listened more attentively, grew animated by degrees, and
smiled.

“Good,” thought Milady; “she takes a pleasure in my conversation. If she
is a cardinalist, she has no fanaticism, at least.”

She then went on to describe the persecutions exercised by the cardinal
upon his enemies. The abbess only crossed herself, without approving or
disapproving.

This confirmed Milady in her opinion that the abbess was rather royalist
than cardinalist. Milady therefore continued, coloring her narrations
more and more.

“I am very ignorant of these matters,” said the abbess, at length; “but
however distant from the court we may be, however remote from the
interests of the world we may be placed, we have very sad examples of
what you have related. And one of our boarders has suffered much from
the vengeance and persecution of the cardinal!”

“One of your boarders?” said Milady; “oh, my God! Poor woman! I pity
her, then.”

“And you have reason, for she is much to be pitied. Imprisonment,
menaces, ill treatment-she has suffered everything. But after all,”
resumed the abbess, “Monsieur Cardinal has perhaps plausible motives for
acting thus; and though she has the look of an angel, we must not always
judge people by the appearance.”

“Good!” said Milady to herself; “who knows! I am about, perhaps, to
discover something here; I am in the vein.”

She tried to give her countenance an appearance of perfect candor.

“Alas,” said Milady, “I know it is so. It is said that we must not trust
to the face; but in what, then, shall we place confidence, if not in the
most beautiful work of the Lord? As for me, I shall be deceived all my
life perhaps, but I shall always have faith in a person whose
countenance inspires me with sympathy.”

“You would, then, be tempted to believe,” said the abbess, “that this
young person is innocent?”

“The cardinal pursues not only crimes,” said she: “there are certain
virtues which he pursues more severely than certain offenses.”

“Permit me, madame, to express my surprise,” said the abbess.

“At what?” said Milady, with the utmost ingenuousness.

“At the language you use.”

“What do you find so astonishing in that language?” said Milady,
smiling.

“You are the friend of the cardinal, for he sends you hither, and yet--”

“And yet I speak ill of him,” replied Milady, finishing the thought of
the superior.

“At least you don’t speak well of him.”

“That is because I am not his friend,” said she, sighing, “but his
victim!”

“But this letter in which he recommends you to me?”

“Is an order for me to confine myself to a sort of prison, from which he
will release me by one of his satellites.”

“But why have you not fled?”

“Whither should I go? Do you believe there is a spot on the earth which
the cardinal cannot reach if he takes the trouble to stretch forth his
hand? If I were a man, that would barely be possible; but what can a
woman do? This young boarder of yours, has she tried to fly?”

“No, that is true; but she--that is another thing; I believe she is
detained in France by some love affair.”

“Ah,” said Milady, with a sigh, “if she loves she is not altogether
wretched.”

“Then,” said the abbess, looking at Milady with increasing interest, “I
behold another poor victim?”

“Alas, yes,” said Milady.

The abbess looked at her for an instant with uneasiness, as if a fresh
thought suggested itself to her mind.

“You are not an enemy of our holy faith?” said she, hesitatingly.

“Who--I?” cried Milady; “I a Protestant? Oh, no! I call to witness the
God who hears us, that on the contrary I am a fervent Catholic!”

“Then, madame,” said the abbess, smiling, “be reassured; the house in
which you are shall not be a very hard prison, and we will do all in our
power to make you cherish your captivity. You will find here, moreover,
the young woman of whom I spoke, who is persecuted, no doubt, in
consequence of some court intrigue. She is amiable and well-behaved.”

“What is her name?”

“She was sent to me by someone of high rank, under the name of Kitty. I
have not tried to discover her other name.”

“Kitty!” cried Milady. “What? Are you sure?”

“That she is called so? Yes, madame. Do you know her?”

Milady smiled to herself at the idea which had occurred to her that this
might be her old chambermaid. There was connected with the remembrance
of this girl a remembrance of anger; and a desire of vengeance
disordered the features of Milady, which, however, immediately recovered
the calm and benevolent expression which this woman of a hundred faces
had for a moment allowed them to lose.

“And when can I see this young lady, for whom I already feel so great a
sympathy?” asked Milady.

“Why, this evening,” said the abbess; “today even. But you have been
traveling these four days, as you told me yourself. This morning you
rose at five o’clock; you must stand in need of repose. Go to bed and
sleep; at dinnertime we will rouse you.”

Although Milady would very willingly have gone without sleep, sustained
as she was by all the excitements which a new adventure awakened in her
heart, ever thirsting for intrigues, she nevertheless accepted the offer
of the superior. During the last fifteen days she had experienced so
many and such various emotions that if her frame of iron was still
capable of supporting fatigue, her mind required repose.

She therefore took leave of the abbess, and went to bed, softly rocked
by the ideas of vengeance which the name of Kitty had naturally brought
to her thoughts. She remembered that almost unlimited promise which the
cardinal had given her if she succeeded in her enterprise. She had
succeeded; d’Artagnan was then in her power!

One thing alone frightened her; that was the remembrance of her husband,
the Comte de la Fere, whom she had believed dead, or at least
expatriated, and whom she found again in Athos-the best friend of
d’Artagnan.

But alas, if he was the friend of d’Artagnan, he must have lent him his
assistance in all the proceedings by whose aid the queen had defeated
the project of his Eminence; if he was the friend of d’Artagnan, he was
the enemy of the cardinal; and she doubtless would succeed in involving
him in the vengeance by which she hoped to destroy the young Musketeer.

All these hopes were so many sweet thoughts for Milady; so, rocked by
them, she soon fell asleep.

She was awakened by a soft voice which sounded at the foot of her bed.
She opened her eyes, and saw the abbess, accompanied by a young woman
with light hair and delicate complexion, who fixed upon her a look full
of benevolent curiosity.

The face of the young woman was entirely unknown to her. Each examined
the other with great attention, while exchanging the customary
compliments; both were very handsome, but of quite different styles of
beauty. Milady, however, smiled in observing that she excelled the young
woman by far in her high air and aristocratic bearing. It is true that
the habit of a novice, which the young woman wore, was not very
advantageous in a contest of this kind.

The abbess introduced them to each other. When this formality was ended,
as her duties called her to chapel, she left the two young women alone.

The novice, seeing Milady in bed, was about to follow the example of the
superior; but Milady stopped her.

“How, madame,” said she, “I have scarcely seen you, and you already wish
to deprive me of your company, upon which I had counted a little, I must
confess, for the time I have to pass here?”

“No, madame,” replied the novice, “only I thought I had chosen my time
ill; you were asleep, you are fatigued.”

“Well,” said Milady, “what can those who sleep wish for--a happy
awakening? This awakening you have given me; allow me, then, to enjoy it
at my ease,” and taking her hand, she drew her toward the armchair by
the bedside.

The novice sat down.

“How unfortunate I am!” said she; “I have been here six months without
the shadow of recreation. You arrive, and your presence was likely to
afford me delightful company; yet I expect, in all probability, to quit
the convent at any moment.”

“How, you are going soon?” asked Milady.

“At least I hope so,” said the novice, with an expression of joy which
she made no effort to disguise.

“I think I learned you had suffered persecutions from the cardinal,”
continued Milady; “that would have been another motive for sympathy
between us.”

“What I have heard, then, from our good mother is true; you have
likewise been a victim of that wicked priest.”

“Hush!” said Milady; “let us not, even here, speak thus of him. All my
misfortunes arise from my having said nearly what you have said before a
woman whom I thought my friend, and who betrayed me. Are you also the
victim of a treachery?”

“No,” said the novice, “but of my devotion--of a devotion to a woman I
loved, for whom I would have laid down my life, for whom I would give it
still.”

“And who has abandoned you--is that it?”

“I have been sufficiently unjust to believe so; but during the last two
or three days I have obtained proof to the contrary, for which I thank
God--for it would have cost me very dear to think she had forgotten me.
But you, madame, you appear to be free,” continued the novice; “and if
you were inclined to fly it only rests with yourself to do so.”

“Whither would you have me go, without friends, without money, in a part
of France with which I am unacquainted, and where I have never been
before?”

“Oh,” cried the novice, “as to friends, you would have them wherever you
want, you appear so good and are so beautiful!”

“That does not prevent,” replied Milady, softening her smile so as to
give it an angelic expression, “my being alone or being persecuted.”

“Hear me,” said the novice; “we must trust in heaven. There always comes
a moment when the good you have done pleads your cause before God; and
see, perhaps it is a happiness for you, humble and powerless as I am,
that you have met with me, for if I leave this place, well-I have
powerful friends, who, after having exerted themselves on my account,
may also exert themselves for you.”

“Oh, when I said I was alone,” said Milady, hoping to make the novice
talk by talking of herself, “it is not for want of friends in high
places; but these friends themselves tremble before the cardinal. The
queen herself does not dare to oppose the terrible minister. I have
proof that her Majesty, notwithstanding her excellent heart, has more
than once been obliged to abandon to the anger of his Eminence persons
who had served her.”

“Trust me, madame; the queen may appear to have abandoned those persons,
but we must not put faith in appearances. The more they are persecuted,
the more she thinks of them; and often, when they least expect it, they
have proof of a kind remembrance.”

“Alas!” said Milady, “I believe so; the queen is so good!”

“Oh, you know her, then, that lovely and noble queen, that you speak of
her thus!” cried the novice, with enthusiasm.

“That is to say,” replied Milady, driven into her entrenchment, “that I
have not the honor of knowing her personally; but I know a great number
of her most intimate friends. I am acquainted with Monsieur de Putange;
I met Monsieur Dujart in England; I know Monsieur de Treville.”

“Monsieur de Treville!” exclaimed the novice, “do you know Monsieur de
Treville?”

“Yes, perfectly well--intimately even.”

“The captain of the king’s Musketeers?”

“The captain of the king’s Musketeers.”

“Why, then, only see!” cried the novice; “we shall soon be well
acquainted, almost friends. If you know Monsieur de Treville, you must
have visited him?”

“Often!” said Milady, who, having entered this track, and perceiving
that falsehood succeeded, was determined to follow it to the end.

“With him, then, you must have seen some of his Musketeers?”

“All those he is in the habit of receiving!” replied Milady, for whom
this conversation began to have a real interest.

“Name a few of those whom you know, and you will see if they are my
friends.”

“Well!” said Milady, embarrassed, “I know Monsieur de Louvigny, Monsieur
de Courtivron, Monsieur de Ferussac.”

The novice let her speak, then seeing that she paused, she said, “Don’t
you know a gentleman named Athos?”

Milady became as pale as the sheets in which she was lying, and mistress
as she was of herself, could not help uttering a cry, seizing the hand
of the novice, and devouring her with looks.

“What is the matter? Good God!” asked the poor woman, “have I said
anything that has wounded you?”

“No; but the name struck me, because I also have known that gentleman,
and it appeared strange to me to meet with a person who appears to know
him well.”

“Oh, yes, very well; not only him, but some of his friends, Messieurs
Porthos and Aramis!”

“Indeed! you know them likewise? I know them,” cried Milady, who began
to feel a chill penetrate her heart.

“Well, if you know them, you know that they are good and free
companions. Why do you not apply to them, if you stand in need of help?”

“That is to say,” stammered Milady, “I am not really very intimate with
any of them. I know them from having heard one of their friends,
Monsieur d’Artagnan, say a great deal about them.”

“You know Monsieur d’Artagnan!” cried the novice, in her turn seizing
the hands of Milady and devouring her with her eyes.

Then remarking the strange expression of Milady’s countenance, she said,
“Pardon me, madame; you know him by what title?”

“Why,” replied Milady, embarrassed, “why, by the title of friend.”

“You deceive me, madame,” said the novice; “you have been his mistress!”

“It is you who have been his mistress, madame!” cried Milady, in her
turn.

“I?” said the novice.

“Yes, you! I know you now. You are Madame Bonacieux!”

The young woman drew back, filled with surprise and terror.

“Oh, do not deny it! Answer!” continued Milady.

“Well, yes, madame,” said the novice, “Are we rivals?”

The countenance of Milady was illumined by so savage a joy that under
any other circumstances Mme. Bonacieux would have fled in terror; but
she was absorbed by jealousy.

“Speak, madame!” resumed Mme. Bonacieux, with an energy of which she
might not have been believed capable. “Have you been, or are you, his
mistress?”

“Oh, no!” cried Milady, with an accent that admitted no doubt of her
truth. “Never, never!”

“I believe you,” said Mme. Bonacieux; “but why, then, did you cry out
so?”

“Do you not understand?” said Milady, who had already overcome her
agitation and recovered all her presence of mind.

“How can I understand? I know nothing.”

“Can you not understand that Monsieur d’Artagnan, being my friend, might
take me into his confidence?”

“Truly?”

“Do you not perceive that I know all--your abduction from the little
house at St. Germain, his despair, that of his friends, and their
useless inquiries up to this moment? How could I help being astonished
when, without having the least expectation of such a thing, I meet you
face to face--you, of whom we have so often spoken together, you whom he
loves with all his soul, you whom he had taught me to love before I had
seen you! Ah, dear Constance, I have found you, then; I see you at
last!”

And Milady stretched out her arms to Mme. Bonacieux, who, convinced by
what she had just said, saw nothing in this woman whom an instant before
she had believed her rival but a sincere and devoted friend.

“Oh, pardon me, pardon me!” cried she, sinking upon the shoulders of
Milady. “Pardon me, I love him so much!”

These two women held each other for an instant in a close embrace.
Certainly, if Milady’s strength had been equal to her hatred, Mme.
Bonacieux would never have left that embrace alive. But not being able
to stifle her, she smiled upon her.

“Oh, you beautiful, good little creature!” said Milady. “How delighted I
am to have found you! Let me look at you!” and while saying these words,
she absolutely devoured her by her looks. “Oh, yes it is you indeed!
From what he has told me, I know you now. I recognize you perfectly.”

The poor young woman could not possibly suspect what frightful cruelty
was behind the rampart of that pure brow, behind those brilliant eyes in
which she read nothing but interest and compassion.

“Then you know what I have suffered,” said Mme. Bonacieux, “since he has
told you what he has suffered; but to suffer for him is happiness.”

Milady replied mechanically, “Yes, that is happiness.” She was thinking
of something else.

“And then,” continued Mme. Bonacieux, “my punishment is drawing to a
close. Tomorrow, this evening, perhaps, I shall see him again; and then
the past will no longer exist.”

“This evening?” asked Milady, roused from her reverie by these words.
“What do you mean? Do you expect news from him?”

“I expect himself.”

“Himself? D’Artagnan here?”

“Himself!”

“But that’s impossible! He is at the siege of La Rochelle with the
cardinal. He will not return till after the taking of the city.”

“Ah, you fancy so! But is there anything impossible for my d’Artagnan,
the noble and loyal gentleman?”

“Oh, I cannot believe you!”

“Well, read, then!” said the unhappy young woman, in the excess of her
pride and joy, presenting a letter to Milady.

“The writing of Madame de Chevreuse!” said Milady to herself. “Ah, I
always thought there was some secret understanding in that quarter!” And
she greedily read the following few lines:

My Dear Child, Hold yourself ready. OUR FRIEND will see you soon, and he
will only see you to release you from that imprisonment in which your
safety required you should be concealed. Prepare, then, for your
departure, and never despair of us.

Our charming Gascon has just proved himself as brave and faithful as
ever. Tell him that certain parties are grateful for the warning he has
given.

“Yes, yes,” said Milady; “the letter is precise. Do you know what that
warning was?”

“No, I only suspect he has warned the queen against some fresh
machinations of the cardinal.”

“Yes, that’s it, no doubt!” said Milady, returning the letter to Mme.
Bonacieux, and letting her head sink pensively upon her bosom.

At that moment they heard the gallop of a horse.

“Oh!” cried Mme. Bonacieux, darting to the window, “can it be he?”

Milady remained still in bed, petrified by surprise; so many unexpected
things happened to her all at once that for the first time she was at a
loss.

“He, he!” murmured she; “can it be he?” And she remained in bed with her
eyes fixed.

“Alas, no!” said Mme. Bonacieux; “it is a man I don’t know, although he
seems to be coming here. Yes, he checks his pace; he stops at the gate;
he rings.”

Milady sprang out of bed.

“You are sure it is not he?” said she.

“Yes, yes, very sure!”

“Perhaps you did not see well.”

“Oh, if I were to see the plume of his hat, the end of his cloak, I
should know HIM!”

Milady was dressing herself all the time.

“Yes, he has entered.”

“It is for you or me!”

“My God, how agitated you seem!”

“Yes, I admit it. I have not your confidence; I fear the cardinal.”

“Hush!” said Mme. Bonacieux; “somebody is coming.”

Immediately the door opened, and the superior entered.

“Did you come from Boulogne?” demanded she of Milady.

“Yes,” replied she, trying to recover her self-possession. “Who wants
me?”

“A man who will not tell his name, but who comes from the cardinal.”

“And who wishes to speak with me?”

“Who wishes to speak to a lady recently come from Boulogne.”

“Then let him come in, if you please.”

“Oh, my God, my God!” cried Mme. Bonacieux. “Can it be bad news?”

“I fear it.”

“I will leave you with this stranger; but as soon as he is gone, if you
will permit me, I will return.”

“PERMIT you? I BESEECH you.”

The superior and Mme. Bonacieux retired.

Milady remained alone, with her eyes fixed upon the door. An instant
later, the jingling of spurs was heard upon the stairs, steps drew near,
the door opened, and a man appeared.

Milady uttered a cry of joy; this man was the Comte de Rochefort--the
demoniacal tool of his Eminence.




62 TWO VARIETIES OF DEMONS


Ah,” cried Milady and Rochefort together, “it is you!”

“Yes, it is I.”

“And you come?” asked Milady.

“From La Rochelle; and you?”

“From England.”

“Buckingham?”

“Dead or desperately wounded, as I left without having been able to hear
anything of him. A fanatic has just assassinated him.”

“Ah,” said Rochefort, with a smile; “this is a fortunate chance--one
that will delight his Eminence! Have you informed him of it?”

“I wrote to him from Boulogne. But what brings you here?”

“His Eminence was uneasy, and sent me to find you.”

“I only arrived yesterday.”

“And what have you been doing since yesterday?”

“I have not lost my time.”

“Oh, I don’t doubt that.”

“Do you know whom I have encountered here?”

“No.”

“Guess.”

“How can I?”

“That young woman whom the queen took out of prison.”

“The mistress of that fellow d’Artagnan?”

“Yes; Madame Bonacieux, with whose retreat the cardinal was
unacquainted.”

“Well, well,” said Rochefort, “here is a chance which may pair off with
the other! Monsieur Cardinal is indeed a privileged man!”

“Imagine my astonishment,” continued Milady, “when I found myself face
to face with this woman!”

“Does she know you?”

“No.”

“Then she looks upon you as a stranger?”

Milady smiled. “I am her best friend.”

“Upon my honor,” said Rochefort, “it takes you, my dear countess, to
perform such miracles!”

“And it is well I can, Chevalier,” said Milady, “for do you know what is
going on here?”

“No.”

“They will come for her tomorrow or the day after, with an order from
the queen.”

“Indeed! And who?”

“d’Artagnan and his friends.”

“Indeed, they will go so far that we shall be obliged to send them to
the Bastille.”

“Why is it not done already?”

“What would you? The cardinal has a weakness for these men which I
cannot comprehend.”

“Indeed!”

“Yes.”

“Well, then, tell him this, Rochefort. Tell him that our conversation at
the inn of the Red Dovecot was overheard by these four men; tell him
that after his departure one of them came up to me and took from me by
violence the safe-conduct which he had given me; tell him they warned
Lord de Winter of my journey to England; that this time they nearly
foiled my mission as they foiled the affair of the studs; tell him that
among these four men two only are to be feared--d’Artagnan and Athos;
tell him that the third, Aramis, is the lover of Madame de Chevreuse--he
may be left alone, we know his secret, and it may be useful; as to the
fourth, Porthos, he is a fool, a simpleton, a blustering booby, not
worth troubling himself about.”

“But these four men must be now at the siege of La Rochelle?”

“I thought so, too; but a letter which Madame Bonacieux has received
from Madame the Constable, and which she has had the imprudence to show
me, leads me to believe that these four men, on the contrary, are on the
road hither to take her away.”

“The devil! What’s to be done?”

“What did the cardinal say about me?”

“I was to take your dispatches, written or verbal, and return by post;
and when he shall know what you have done, he will advise what you have
to do.”

“I must, then, remain here?”

“Here, or in the neighborhood.”

“You cannot take me with you?”

“No, the order is imperative. Near the camp you might be recognized; and
your presence, you must be aware, would compromise the cardinal.”

“Then I must wait here, or in the neighborhood?”

“Only tell me beforehand where you will wait for intelligence from the
cardinal; let me know always where to find you.”

“Observe, it is probable that I may not be able to remain here.”

“Why?”

“You forget that my enemies may arrive at any minute.”

“That’s true; but is this little woman, then, to escape his Eminence?”

“Bah!” said Milady, with a smile that belonged only to herself; “you
forget that I am her best friend.”

“Ah, that’s true! I may then tell the cardinal, with respect to this
little woman--”

“That he may be at ease.”

“Is that all?”

“He will know what that means.”

“He will guess, at least. Now, then, what had I better do?”

“Return instantly. It appears to me that the news you bear is worth the
trouble of a little diligence.”

“My chaise broke down coming into Lilliers.”

“Capital!”

“What, CAPITAL?”

“Yes, I want your chaise.”

“And how shall I travel, then?”

“On horseback.”

“You talk very comfortably,--a hundred and eighty leagues!”

“What’s that?”

“One can do it! Afterward?”

“Afterward? Why, in passing through Lilliers you will send me your
chaise, with an order to your servant to place himself at my disposal.”

“Well.”

“You have, no doubt, some order from the cardinal about you?”

“I have my FULL POWER.”

“Show it to the abbess, and tell her that someone will come and fetch
me, either today or tomorrow, and that I am to follow the person who
presents himself in your name.”

“Very well.”

“Don’t forget to treat me harshly in speaking of me to the abbess.”

“To what purpose?”

“I am a victim of the cardinal. It is necessary to inspire confidence in
that poor little Madame Bonacieux.”

“That’s true. Now, will you make me a report of all that has happened?”

“Why, I have related the events to you. You have a good memory; repeat
what I have told you. A paper may be lost.”

“You are right; only let me know where to find you that I may not run
needlessly about the neighborhood.”

“That’s correct; wait!”

“Do you want a map?”

“Oh, I know this country marvelously!”

“You? When were you here?”

“I was brought up here.”

“Truly?”

“It is worth something, you see, to have been brought up somewhere.”

“You will wait for me, then?”

“Let me reflect a little! Ay, that will do--at Armentieres.”

“Where is that Armentieres?”

“A little town on the Lys; I shall only have to cross the river, and I
shall be in a foreign country.”

“Capital! but it is understood you will only cross the river in case of
danger.”

“That is well understood.”

“And in that case, how shall I know where you are?”

“You do not want your lackey?”

“Is he a sure man?”

“To the proof.”

“Give him to me. Nobody knows him. I will leave him at the place I quit,
and he will conduct you to me.”

“And you say you will wait for me at Armentieres?”

“At Armentieres.”

“Write that name on a bit of paper, lest I should forget it. There is
nothing compromising in the name of a town. Is it not so?”

“Eh, who knows? Never mind,” said Milady, writing the name on half a
sheet of paper; “I will compromise myself.”

“Well,” said Rochefort, taking the paper from Milady, folding it, and
placing it in the lining of his hat, “you may be easy. I will do as
children do, for fear of losing the paper--repeat the name along the
route. Now, is that all?”

“I believe so.”

“Let us see: Buckingham dead or grievously wounded; your conversation
with the cardinal overheard by the four Musketeers; Lord de Winter
warned of your arrival at Portsmouth; d’Artagnan and Athos to the
Bastille; Aramis the lover of Madame de Chevreuse; Porthos an ass;
Madame Bonacieux found again; to send you the chaise as soon as
possible; to place my lackey at your disposal; to make you out a victim
of the cardinal in order that the abbess may entertain no suspicion;
Armentieres, on the banks of the Lys. Is that all, then?”

“In truth, my dear Chevalier, you are a miracle of memory. A PROPOS, add
one thing--”

“What?”

“I saw some very pretty woods which almost touch the convent garden. Say
that I am permitted to walk in those woods. Who knows? Perhaps I shall
stand in need of a back door for retreat.”

“You think of everything.”

“And you forget one thing.”

“What?”

“To ask me if I want money.”

“That’s true. How much do you want?”

“All you have in gold.”

“I have five hundred pistoles, or thereabouts.”

“I have as much. With a thousand pistoles one may face everything. Empty
your pockets.”

“There.”

“Right. And you go--”

“In an hour--time to eat a morsel, during which I shall send for a post
horse.”

“Capital! Adieu, Chevalier.”

“Adieu, Countess.”

“Commend me to the cardinal.”

“Commend me to Satan.”

Milady and Rochefort exchanged a smile and separated. An hour afterward
Rochefort set out at a grand gallop; five hours after that he passed
through Arras.

Our readers already know how he was recognized by d’Artagnan, and how
that recognition by inspiring fear in the four Musketeers had given
fresh activity to their journey.




63 THE DROP OF WATER


Rochefort had scarcely departed when Mme. Bonacieux re-entered. She
found Milady with a smiling countenance.

“Well,” said the young woman, “what you dreaded has happened. This
evening, or tomorrow, the cardinal will send someone to take you away.”

“Who told you that, my dear?” asked Milady.

“I heard it from the mouth of the messenger himself.”

“Come and sit down close to me,” said Milady.

“Here I am.”

“Wait till I assure myself that nobody hears us.”

“Why all these precautions?”

“You shall know.”

Milady arose, went to the door, opened it, looked in the corridor, and
then returned and seated herself close to Mme. Bonacieux.

“Then,” said she, “he has well played his part.”

“Who has?”

“He who just now presented himself to the abbess as a messenger from the
cardinal.”

“It was, then, a part he was playing?”

“Yes, my child.”

“That man, then, was not--”

“That man,” said Milady, lowering her voice, “is my brother.”

“Your brother!” cried Mme. Bonacieux.

“No one must know this secret, my dear, but yourself. If you reveal it
to anyone in the world, I shall be lost, and perhaps yourself likewise.”

“Oh, my God!”

“Listen. This is what has happened: My brother, who was coming to my
assistance to take me away by force if it were necessary, met with the
emissary of the cardinal, who was coming in search of me. He followed
him. At a solitary and retired part of the road he drew his sword, and
required the messenger to deliver up to him the papers of which he was
the bearer. The messenger resisted; my brother killed him.”

“Oh!” said Mme. Bonacieux, shuddering.

“Remember, that was the only means. Then my brother determined to
substitute cunning for force. He took the papers, and presented himself
here as the emissary of the cardinal, and in an hour or two a carriage
will come to take me away by the orders of his Eminence.”

“I understand. It is your brother who sends this carriage.”

“Exactly; but that is not all. That letter you have received, and which
you believe to be from Madame de Chevreuse--”

“Well?”

“It is a forgery.”

“How can that be?”

“Yes, a forgery; it is a snare to prevent your making any resistance
when they come to fetch you.”

“But it is d’Artagnan that will come.”

“Do not deceive yourself. D’Artagnan and his friends are detained at the
siege of La Rochelle.”

“How do you know that?”

“My brother met some emissaries of the cardinal in the uniform of
Musketeers. You would have been summoned to the gate; you would have
believed yourself about to meet friends; you would have been abducted,
and conducted back to Paris.”

“Oh, my God! My senses fail me amid such a chaos of iniquities. I feel,
if this continues,” said Mme. Bonacieux, raising her hands to her
forehead, “I shall go mad!”

“Stop--”

“What?”

“I hear a horse’s steps; it is my brother setting off again. I should
like to offer him a last salute. Come!”

Milady opened the window, and made a sign to Mme. Bonacieux to join her.
The young woman complied.

Rochefort passed at a gallop.

“Adieu, brother!” cried Milady.

The chevalier raised his head, saw the two young women, and without
stopping, waved his hand in a friendly way to Milady.

“The good George!” said she, closing the window with an expression of
countenance full of affection and melancholy. And she resumed her seat,
as if plunged in reflections entirely personal.

“Dear lady,” said Mme. Bonacieux, “pardon me for interrupting you; but
what do you advise me to do? Good heaven! You have more experience than
I have. Speak; I will listen.”

“In the first place,” said Milady, “it is possible I may be deceived,
and that d’Artagnan and his friends may really come to your assistance.”

“Oh, that would be too much!” cried Mme. Bonacieux, “so much happiness
is not in store for me!”

“Then you comprehend it would be only a question of time, a sort of
race, which should arrive first. If your friends are the more speedy,
you are to be saved; if the satellites of the cardinal, you are lost.”

“Oh, yes, yes; lost beyond redemption! What, then, to do? What to do?”

“There would be a very simple means, very natural--”

“Tell me what!”

“To wait, concealed in the neighborhood, and assure yourself who are the
men who come to ask for you.”

“But where can I wait?”

“Oh, there is no difficulty in that. I shall stop and conceal myself a
few leagues hence until my brother can rejoin me. Well, I take you with
me; we conceal ourselves, and wait together.”

“But I shall not be allowed to go; I am almost a prisoner.”

“As they believe that I go in consequence of an order from the cardinal,
no one will believe you anxious to follow me.”

“Well?”

“Well! The carriage is at the door; you bid me adieu; you mount the step
to embrace me a last time; my brother’s servant, who comes to fetch me,
is told how to proceed; he makes a sign to the postillion, and we set
off at a gallop.”

“But d’Artagnan! D’Artagnan! if he comes?”

“Shall we not know it?”

“How?”

“Nothing easier. We will send my brother’s servant back to Bethune,
whom, as I told you, we can trust. He shall assume a disguise, and place
himself in front of the convent. If the emissaries of the cardinal
arrive, he will take no notice; if it is Monsieur d’Artagnan and his
friends, he will bring them to us.”

“He knows them, then?”

“Doubtless. Has he not seen Monsieur d’Artagnan at my house?”

“Oh, yes, yes; you are right. Thus all may go well--all may be for the
best; but we do not go far from this place?”

“Seven or eight leagues at the most. We will keep on the frontiers, for
instance; and at the first alarm we can leave France.”

“And what can we do there?”

“Wait.”

“But if they come?”

“My brother’s carriage will be here first.”

“If I should happen to be any distance from you when the carriage comes
for you--at dinner or supper, for instance?”

“Do one thing.”

“What is that?”

“Tell your good superior that in order that we may be as much together
as possible, you ask her permission to share my repast.”

“Will she permit it?”

“What inconvenience can it be?”

“Oh, delightful! In this way we shall not be separated for an instant.”

“Well, go down to her, then, to make your request. I feel my head a
little confused; I will take a turn in the garden.”

“Go; and where shall I find you?”

“Here, in an hour.”

“Here, in an hour. Oh, you are so kind, and I am so grateful!”

“How can I avoid interesting myself for one who is so beautiful and so
amiable? Are you not the beloved of one of my best friends?”

“Dear d’Artagnan! Oh, how he will thank you!”

“I hope so. Now, then, all is agreed; let us go down.”

“You are going into the garden?”

“Yes.”

“Go along this corridor, down a little staircase, and you are in it.”

“Excellent; thank you!”

And the two women parted, exchanging charming smiles.

Milady had told the truth--her head was confused, for her ill-arranged
plans clashed one another like chaos. She required to be alone that she
might put her thoughts a little into order. She saw vaguely the future;
but she stood in need of a little silence and quiet to give all her
ideas, as yet confused, a distinct form and a regular plan.

What was most pressing was to get Mme. Bonacieux away, and convey her to
a place of safety, and there, if matters required, make her a hostage.
Milady began to have doubts of the issue of this terrible duel, in which
her enemies showed as much perseverance as she did animosity.

Besides, she felt as we feel when a storm is coming on--that this issue
was near, and could not fail to be terrible.

The principal thing for her, then, was, as we have said, to keep Mme.
Bonacieux in her power. Mme. Bonacieux was the very life of d’Artagnan.
This was more than his life, the life of the woman he loved; this was,
in case of ill fortune, a means of temporizing and obtaining good
conditions.

Now, this point was settled; Mme. Bonacieux, without any suspicion,
accompanied her. Once concealed with her at Armentieres, it would be
easy to make her believe that d’Artagnan had not come to Bethune. In
fifteen days at most, Rochefort would be back; besides, during that
fifteen days she would have time to think how she could best avenge
herself on the four friends. She would not be weary, thank God! for she
should enjoy the sweetest pastime such events could accord a woman of
her character--perfecting a beautiful vengeance.

Revolving all this in her mind, she cast her eyes around her, and
arranged the topography of the garden in her head. Milady was like a
good general who contemplates at the same time victory and defeat, and
who is quite prepared, according to the chances of the battle, to march
forward or to beat a retreat.

At the end of an hour she heard a soft voice calling her; it was Mme.
Bonacieux’s. The good abbess had naturally consented to her request; and
as a commencement, they were to sup together.

On reaching the courtyard, they heard the noise of a carriage which
stopped at the gate.

Milady listened.

“Do you hear anything?” said she.

“Yes, the rolling of a carriage.”

“It is the one my brother sends for us.”

“Oh, my God!”

“Come, come! courage!”

The bell of the convent gate was sounded; Milady was not mistaken.

“Go to your chamber,” said she to Mme. Bonacieux; “you have perhaps some
jewels you would like to take.”

“I have his letters,” said she.

“Well, go and fetch them, and come to my apartment. We will snatch some
supper; we shall perhaps travel part of the night, and must keep our
strength up.”

“Great God!” said Mme. Bonacieux, placing her hand upon her bosom, “my
heart beats so I cannot walk.”

“Courage, courage! remember that in a quarter of an hour you will be
safe; and think that what you are about to do is for HIS sake.”

“Yes, yes, everything for him. You have restored my courage by a single
word; go, I will rejoin you.”

Milady ran up to her apartment quickly; she there found Rochefort’s
lackey, and gave him his instructions.

He was to wait at the gate; if by chance the Musketeers should appear,
the carriage was to set off as fast as possible, pass around the
convent, and go and wait for Milady at a little village which was
situated at the other side of the wood. In this case Milady would cross
the garden and gain the village on foot. As we have already said, Milady
was admirably acquainted with this part of France.

If the Musketeers did not appear, things were to go on as had been
agreed; Mme. Bonacieux was to get into the carriage as if to bid her
adieu, and she was to take away Mme. Bonacieux.

Mme. Bonacieux came in; and to remove all suspicion, if she had any,
Milady repeated to the lackey, before her, the latter part of her
instructions.

Milady asked some questions about the carriage. It was a chaise drawn by
three horses, driven by a postillion; Rochefort’s lackey would precede
it, as courier.

Milady was wrong in fearing that Mme. Bonacieux would have any
suspicion. The poor young woman was too pure to suppose that any female
could be guilty of such perfidy; besides, the name of the Comtesse de
Winter, which she had heard the abbess pronounce, was wholly unknown to
her, and she was even ignorant that a woman had had so great and so
fatal a share in the misfortune of her life.

“You see,” said she, when the lackey had gone out, “everything is ready.
The abbess suspects nothing, and believes that I am taken by order of
the cardinal. This man goes to give his last orders; take the least
thing, drink a finger of wine, and let us be gone.”

“Yes,” said Mme. Bonacieux, mechanically, “yes, let us be gone.”

Milady made her a sign to sit down opposite, poured her a small glass of
Spanish wine, and helped her to the wing of a chicken.

“See,” said she, “if everything does not second us! Here is night coming
on; by daybreak we shall have reached our retreat, and nobody can guess
where we are. Come, courage! take something.”

Mme. Bonacieux ate a few mouthfuls mechanically, and just touched the
glass with her lips.

“Come, come!” said Milady, lifting hers to her mouth, “do as I do.”

But at the moment the glass touched her lips, her hand remained
suspended; she heard something on the road which sounded like the
rattling of a distant gallop. Then it grew nearer, and it seemed to her,
almost at the same time, that she heard the neighing of horses.

This noise acted upon her joy like the storm which awakens the sleeper
in the midst of a happy dream; she grew pale and ran to the window,
while Mme. Bonacieux, rising all in a tremble, supported herself upon
her chair to avoid falling. Nothing was yet to be seen, only they heard
the galloping draw nearer.

“Oh, my God!” said Mme. Bonacieux, “what is that noise?”

“That of either our friends or our enemies,” said Milady, with her
terrible coolness. “Stay where you are, I will tell you.”

Mme. Bonacieux remained standing, mute, motionless, and pale as a
statue.

The noise became louder; the horses could not be more than a hundred and
fifty paces distant. If they were not yet to be seen, it was because the
road made an elbow. The noise became so distinct that the horses might
be counted by the rattle of their hoofs.

Milady gazed with all the power of her attention; it was just light
enough for her to see who was coming.

All at once, at the turning of the road she saw the glitter of laced
hats and the waving of feathers; she counted two, then five, then eight
horsemen. One of them preceded the rest by double the length of his
horse.

Milady uttered a stifled groan. In the first horseman she recognized
d’Artagnan.

“Oh, my God, my God,” cried Mme. Bonacieux, “what is it?”

“It is the uniform of the cardinal’s Guards. Not an instant to be lost!
Fly, fly!”

“Yes, yes, let us fly!” repeated Mme. Bonacieux, but without being able
to make a step, glued as she was to the spot by terror.

They heard the horsemen pass under the windows.

“Come, then, come, then!” cried Milady, trying to drag the young woman
along by the arm. “Thanks to the garden, we yet can flee; I have the
key, but make haste! in five minutes it will be too late!”

Mme. Bonacieux tried to walk, made two steps, and sank upon her knees.
Milady tried to raise and carry her, but could not do it.

At this moment they heard the rolling of the carriage, which at the
approach of the Musketeers set off at a gallop. Then three or four shots
were fired.

“For the last time, will you come?” cried Milady.

“Oh, my God, my God! you see my strength fails me; you see plainly I
cannot walk. Flee alone!”

“Flee alone, and leave you here? No, no, never!” cried Milady.

All at once she paused, a livid flash darted from her eyes; she ran to
the table, emptied into Mme. Bonacieux’s glass the contents of a ring
which she opened with singular quickness. It was a grain of a reddish
color, which dissolved immediately.

Then, taking the glass with a firm hand, she said, “Drink. This wine
will give you strength, drink!” And she put the glass to the lips of the
young woman, who drank mechanically.

“This is not the way that I wished to avenge myself,” said Milady,
replacing the glass upon the table, with an infernal smile, “but, my
faith! we do what we can!” And she rushed out of the room.

Mme. Bonacieux saw her go without being able to follow her; she was like
people who dream they are pursued, and who in vain try to walk.

A few moments passed; a great noise was heard at the gate. Every instant
Mme. Bonacieux expected to see Milady, but she did not return. Several
times, with terror, no doubt, the cold sweat burst from her burning
brow.

At length she heard the grating of the hinges of the opening gates; the
noise of boots and spurs resounded on the stairs. There was a great
murmur of voices which continued to draw near, amid which she seemed to
hear her own name pronounced.

All at once she uttered a loud cry of joy, and darted toward the door;
she had recognized the voice of d’Artagnan.

“d’Artagnan! D’Artagnan!” cried she, “is it you? This way! this way!”

“Constance? Constance?” replied the young man, “where are you? where are
you? My God!”

At the same moment the door of the cell yielded to a shock, rather than
opened; several men rushed into the chamber. Mme. Bonacieux had sunk
into an armchair, without the power of moving.

D’Artagnan threw down a yet-smoking pistol which he held in his hand,
and fell on his knees before his mistress. Athos replaced his in his
belt; Porthos and Aramis, who held their drawn swords in their hands,
returned them to their scabbards.

“Oh, d’Artagnan, my beloved d’Artagnan! You have come, then, at last!
You have not deceived me! It is indeed thee!”

“Yes, yes, Constance. Reunited!”

“Oh, it was in vain she told me you would not come! I hoped in silence.
I was not willing to fly. Oh, I have done well! How happy I am!”

At this word SHE, Athos, who had seated himself quietly, started up.

“SHE! What she?” asked d’Artagnan.

“Why, my companion. She who out of friendship for me wished to take me
from my persecutors. She who, mistaking you for the cardinal’s Guards,
has just fled away.”

“Your companion!” cried d’Artagnan, becoming more pale than the white
veil of his mistress. “Of what companion are you speaking, dear
Constance?”

“Of her whose carriage was at the gate; of a woman who calls herself
your friend; of a woman to whom you have told everything.”

“Her name, her name!” cried d’Artagnan. “My God, can you not remember
her name?”

“Yes, it was pronounced in my hearing once. Stop--but--it is very
strange--oh, my God, my head swims! I cannot see!”

“Help, help, my friends! her hands are icy cold,” cried d’Artagnan. “She
is ill! Great God, she is losing her senses!”

While Porthos was calling for help with all the power of his strong
voice, Aramis ran to the table to get a glass of water; but he stopped
at seeing the horrible alteration that had taken place in the
countenance of Athos, who, standing before the table, his hair rising
from his head, his eyes fixed in stupor, was looking at one of the
glasses, and appeared a prey to the most horrible doubt.

“Oh!” said Athos, “oh, no, it is impossible! God would not permit such a
crime!”

“Water, water!” cried d’Artagnan. “Water!”

“Oh, poor woman, poor woman!” murmured Athos, in a broken voice.

Mme. Bonacieux opened her eyes under the kisses of d’Artagnan.

“She revives!” cried the young man. “Oh, my God, my God, I thank thee!”

“Madame!” said Athos, “madame, in the name of heaven, whose empty glass
is this?”

“Mine, monsieur,” said the young woman, in a dying voice.

“But who poured the wine for you that was in this glass?”

“She.”

“But who is SHE?”

“Oh, I remember!” said Mme. Bonacieux, “the Comtesse de Winter.”

The four friends uttered one and the same cry, but that of Athos
dominated all the rest.

At that moment the countenance of Mme. Bonacieux became livid; a fearful
agony pervaded her frame, and she sank panting into the arms of Porthos
and Aramis.

D’Artagnan seized the hands of Athos with an anguish difficult to be
described.

“And what do you believe?’ His voice was stifled by sobs.

“I believe everything,” said Athos, biting his lips till the blood
sprang to avoid sighing.

“d’Artagnan, d’Artagnan!” cried Mme. Bonacieux, “where art thou? Do not
leave me! You see I am dying!”

D’Artagnan released the hands of Athos which he still held clasped in
both his own, and hastened to her. Her beautiful face was distorted with
agony; her glassy eyes had no longer their sight; a convulsive
shuddering shook her whole body; the sweat rolled from her brow.

“In the name of heaven, run, call! Aramis! Porthos! Call for help!”

“Useless!” said Athos, “useless! For the poison which SHE pours there is
no antidote.”

“Yes, yes! Help, help!” murmured Mme. Bonacieux; “help!”

Then, collecting all her strength, she took the head of the young man
between her hands, looked at him for an instant as if her whole soul
passed into that look, and with a sobbing cry pressed her lips to his.

“Constance, Constance!” cried d’Artagnan.

A sigh escaped from the mouth of Mme. Bonacieux, and dwelt for an
instant on the lips of d’Artagnan. That sigh was the soul, so chaste and
so loving, which reascended to heaven.

D’Artagnan pressed nothing but a corpse in his arms. The young man
uttered a cry, and fell by the side of his mistress as pale and as icy
as herself.

Porthos wept; Aramis pointed toward heaven; Athos made the sign of the
cross.

At that moment a man appeared in the doorway, almost as pale as those in
the chamber. He looked around him and saw Mme. Bonacieux dead, and
d’Artagnan in a swoon. He appeared just at that moment of stupor which
follows great catastrophes.

“I was not deceived,” said he; “here is Monsieur d’Artagnan; and you are
his friends, Messieurs Athos, Porthos, and Aramis.”

The persons whose names were thus pronounced looked at the stranger with
astonishment. It seemed to all three that they knew him.

“Gentlemen,” resumed the newcomer, “you are, as I am, in search of a
woman who,” added he, with a terrible smile, “must have passed this way,
for I see a corpse.”

The three friends remained mute--for although the voice as well as the
countenance reminded them of someone they had seen, they could not
remember under what circumstances.

“Gentlemen,” continued the stranger, “since you do not recognize a man
who probably owes his life to you twice, I must name myself. I am Lord
de Winter, brother-in-law of THAT WOMAN.”

The three friends uttered a cry of surprise.

Athos rose, and offering him his hand, “Be welcome, my Lord,” said he,
“you are one of us.”

“I set out five hours after her from Portsmouth,” said Lord de Winter.
“I arrived three hours after her at Boulogne. I missed her by twenty
minutes at St. Omer. Finally, at Lilliers I lost all trace of her. I was
going about at random, inquiring of everybody, when I saw you gallop
past. I recognized Monsieur d’Artagnan. I called to you, but you did not
answer me; I wished to follow you, but my horse was too much fatigued to
go at the same pace with yours. And yet it appears, in spite of all your
diligence, you have arrived too late.”

“You see!” said Athos, pointing to Mme. Bonacieux dead, and to
d’Artagnan, whom Porthos and Aramis were trying to recall to life.

“Are they both dead?” asked Lord de Winter, sternly.

“No,” replied Athos, “fortunately Monsieur d’Artagnan has only fainted.”

“Ah, indeed, so much the better!” said Lord de Winter.

At that moment d’Artagnan opened his eyes. He tore himself from the arms
of Porthos and Aramis, and threw himself like a madman on the corpse of
his mistress.

Athos rose, walked toward his friend with a slow and solemn step,
embraced him tenderly, and as he burst into violent sobs, he said to him
with his noble and persuasive voice, “Friend, be a man! Women weep for
the dead; men avenge them!”

“Oh, yes!” cried d’Artagnan, “yes! If it be to avenge her, I am ready to
follow you.”

Athos profited by this moment of strength which the hope of vengeance
restored to his unfortunate friend to make a sign to Porthos and Aramis
to go and fetch the superior.

The two friends met her in the corridor, greatly troubled and much upset
by such strange events; she called some of the nuns, who against all
monastic custom found themselves in the presence of five men.

“Madame,” said Athos, passing his arm under that of d’Artagnan, “we
abandon to your pious care the body of that unfortunate woman. She was
an angel on earth before being an angel in heaven. Treat her as one of
your sisters. We will return someday to pray over her grave.”

D’Artagnan concealed his face in the bosom of Athos, and sobbed aloud.

“Weep,” said Athos, “weep, heart full of love, youth, and life! Alas,
would I could weep like you!”

And he drew away his friend, as affectionate as a father, as consoling
as a priest, noble as a man who has suffered much.

All five, followed by their lackeys leading their horses, took their way
to the town of Bethune, whose outskirts they perceived, and stopped
before the first inn they came to.

“But,” said d’Artagnan, “shall we not pursue that woman?”

“Later,” said Athos. “I have measures to take.”

“She will escape us,” replied the young man; “she will escape us, and it
will be your fault, Athos.”

“I will be accountable for her,” said Athos.

D’Artagnan had so much confidence in the word of his friend that he
lowered his head, and entered the inn without reply.

Porthos and Aramis regarded each other, not understanding this assurance
of Athos.

Lord de Winter believed he spoke in this manner to soothe the grief of
d’Artagnan.

“Now, gentlemen,” said Athos, when he had ascertained there were five
chambers free in the hotel, “let everyone retire to his own apartment.
d’Artagnan needs to be alone, to weep and to sleep. I take charge of
everything; be easy.”

“It appears, however,” said Lord de Winter, “if there are any measures
to take against the countess, it concerns me; she is my sister-in-law.”

“And me,” said Athos, “--she is my wife!”

D’Artagnan smiled--for he understood that Athos was sure of his
vengeance when he revealed such a secret. Porthos and Aramis looked at
each other, and grew pale. Lord de Winter thought Athos was mad.

“Now, retire to your chambers,” said Athos, “and leave me to act. You
must perceive that in my quality of a husband this concerns me. Only,
d’Artagnan, if you have not lost it, give me the paper which fell from
that man’s hat, upon which is written the name of the village of--”

“Ah,” said d’Artagnan, “I comprehend! that name written in her hand.”

“You see, then,” said Athos, “there is a god in heaven still!”




64 THE MAN IN THE RED CLOAK


The despair of Athos had given place to a concentrated grief which only
rendered more lucid the brilliant mental faculties of that extraordinary
man.

Possessed by one single thought--that of the promise he had made, and of
the responsibility he had taken--he retired last to his chamber, begged
the host to procure him a map of the province, bent over it, examined
every line traced upon it, perceived that there were four different
roads from Bethune to Armentieres, and summoned the lackeys.

Planchet, Grimaud, Bazin, and Mousqueton presented themselves, and
received clear, positive, and serious orders from Athos.

They must set out the next morning at daybreak, and go to
Armentieres--each by a different route. Planchet, the most intelligent
of the four, was to follow that by which the carriage had gone upon
which the four friends had fired, and which was accompanied, as may be
remembered, by Rochefort’s servant.

Athos set the lackeys to work first because, since these men had been in
the service of himself and his friends he had discovered in each of them
different and essential qualities. Then, lackeys who ask questions
inspire less mistrust than masters, and meet with more sympathy among
those to whom they address themselves. Besides, Milady knew the masters,
and did not know the lackeys; on the contrary, the lackeys knew Milady
perfectly.

All four were to meet the next day at eleven o’clock. If they had
discovered Milady’s retreat, three were to remain on guard; the fourth
was to return to Bethune in order to inform Athos and serve as a guide
to the four friends. These arrangements made, the lackeys retired.

Athos then arose from his chair, girded on his sword, enveloped himself
in his cloak, and left the hotel. It was nearly ten o’clock. At ten
o’clock in the evening, it is well known, the streets in provincial
towns are very little frequented. Athos nevertheless was visibly anxious
to find someone of whom he could ask a question. At length he met a
belated passenger, went up to him, and spoke a few words to him. The man
he addressed recoiled with terror, and only answered the few words of
the Musketeer by pointing. Athos offered the man half a pistole to
accompany him, but the man refused.

Athos then plunged into the street the man had indicated with his
finger; but arriving at four crossroads, he stopped again, visibly
embarrassed. Nevertheless, as the crossroads offered him a better chance
than any other place of meeting somebody, he stood still. In a few
minutes a night watch passed. Athos repeated to him the same question he
had asked the first person he met. The night watch evinced the same
terror, refused, in his turn, to accompany Athos, and only pointed with
his hand to the road he was to take.

Athos walked in the direction indicated, and reached the suburb situated
at the opposite extremity of the city from that by which he and his
friends had entered it. There he again appeared uneasy and embarrassed,
and stopped for the third time.

Fortunately, a mendicant passed, who, coming up to Athos to ask charity,
Athos offered him half a crown to accompany him where he was going. The
mendicant hesitated at first, but at the sight of the piece of silver
which shone in the darkness he consented, and walked on before Athos.

Arrived at the angle of a street, he pointed to a small house, isolated,
solitary, and dismal. Athos went toward the house, while the mendicant,
who had received his reward, left as fast as his legs could carry him.

Athos went round the house before he could distinguish the door, amid
the red color in which the house was painted. No light appeared through
the chinks of the shutters; no noise gave reason to believe that it was
inhabited. It was dark and silent as the tomb.

Three times Athos knocked without receiving an answer. At the third
knock, however, steps were heard inside. The door at length was opened,
and a man appeared, of high stature, pale complexion, and black hair and
beard.

Athos and he exchanged some words in a low voice, then the tall man made
a sign to the Musketeer that he might come in. Athos immediately
profited by the permission, and the door was closed behind him.

The man whom Athos had come so far to seek, and whom he had found with
so much trouble, introduced him into his laboratory, where he was
engaged in fastening together with iron wire the dry bones of a
skeleton. All the frame was adjusted except the head, which lay on the
table.

All the rest of the furniture indicated that the dweller in this house
occupied himself with the study of natural science. There were large
bottles filled with serpents, ticketed according to their species; dried
lizards shone like emeralds set in great squares of black wood, and
bunches of wild odoriferous herbs, doubtless possessed of virtues
unknown to common men, were fastened to the ceiling and hung down in the
corners of the apartment. There was no family, no servant; the tall man
alone inhabited this house.

Athos cast a cold and indifferent glance upon the objects we have
described, and at the invitation of him whom he came to seek sat down
near him.

Then he explained to him the cause of his visit, and the service he
required of him. But scarcely had he expressed his request when the
unknown, who remained standing before the Musketeer, drew back with
signs of terror, and refused. Then Athos took from his pocket a small
paper, on which two lines were written, accompanied by a signature and a
seal, and presented them to him who had made too prematurely these signs
of repugnance. The tall man had scarcely read these lines, seen the
signature, and recognized the seal, when he bowed to denote that he had
no longer any objection to make, and that he was ready to obey.

Athos required no more. He arose, bowed, went out, returned by the same
way he came, re-entered the hotel, and went to his apartment.

At daybreak d’Artagnan entered the chamber, and demanded what was to be
done.

“To wait,” replied Athos.

Some minutes after, the superior of the convent sent to inform the
Musketeers that the burial would take place at midday. As to the
poisoner, they had heard no tidings of her whatever, only that she must
have made her escape through the garden, on the sand of which her
footsteps could be traced, and the door of which had been found shut. As
to the key, it had disappeared.

At the hour appointed, Lord de Winter and the four friends repaired to
the convent; the bells tolled, the chapel was open, the grating of the
choir was closed. In the middle of the choir the body of the victim,
clothed in her novitiate dress, was exposed. On each side of the choir
and behind the gratings opening into the convent was assembled the whole
community of the Carmelites, who listened to the divine service, and
mingled their chant with the chant of the priests, without seeing the
profane, or being seen by them.

At the door of the chapel d’Artagnan felt his courage fall anew, and
returned to look for Athos; but Athos had disappeared.

Faithful to his mission of vengeance, Athos had requested to be
conducted to the garden; and there upon the sand following the light
steps of this woman, who left sharp tracks wherever she went, he
advanced toward the gate which led into the wood, and causing it to be
opened, he went out into the forest.

Then all his suspicions were confirmed; the road by which the carriage
had disappeared encircled the forest. Athos followed the road for some
time, his eyes fixed upon the ground; slight stains of blood, which came
from the wound inflicted upon the man who accompanied the carriage as a
courier, or from one of the horses, dotted the road. At the end of
three-quarters of a league, within fifty paces of Festubert, a larger
bloodstain appeared; the ground was trampled by horses. Between the
forest and this accursed spot, a little behind the trampled ground, was
the same track of small feet as in the garden; the carriage had stopped
here. At this spot Milady had come out of the wood, and entered the
carriage.

Satisfied with this discovery which confirmed all his suspicions, Athos
returned to the hotel, and found Planchet impatiently waiting for him.

Everything was as Athos had foreseen.

Planchet had followed the road; like Athos, he had discovered the stains
of blood; like Athos, he had noted the spot where the horses had halted.
But he had gone farther than Athos--for at the village of Festubert,
while drinking at an inn, he had learned without needing to ask a
question that the evening before, at half-past eight, a wounded man who
accompanied a lady traveling in a post-chaise had been obliged to stop,
unable to go further. The accident was set down to the account of
robbers, who had stopped the chaise in the wood. The man remained in the
village; the woman had had a relay of horses, and continued her journey.

Planchet went in search of the postillion who had driven her, and found
him. He had taken the lady as far as Fromelles; and from Fromelles she
had set out for Armentieres. Planchet took the crossroad, and by seven
o’clock in the morning he was at Armentieres.

There was but one tavern, the Post. Planchet went and presented himself
as a lackey out of a place, who was in search of a situation. He had not
chatted ten minutes with the people of the tavern before he learned that
a woman had come there alone about eleven o’clock the night before, had
engaged a chamber, had sent for the master of the hotel, and told him
she desired to remain some time in the neighborhood.

Planchet had no need to learn more. He hastened to the rendezvous, found
the lackeys at their posts, placed them as sentinels at all the outlets
of the hotel, and came to find Athos, who had just received this
information when his friends returned.

All their countenances were melancholy and gloomy, even the mild
countenance of Aramis.

“What is to be done?” asked d’Artagnan.

“To wait!” replied Athos.

Each retired to his own apartment.

At eight o’clock in the evening Athos ordered the horses to be saddled,
and Lord de Winter and his friends notified that they must prepare for
the expedition.

In an instant all five were ready. Each examined his arms, and put them
in order. Athos came down last, and found d’Artagnan already on
horseback, and growing impatient.

“Patience!” cried Athos; “one of our party is still wanting.”

The four horsemen looked round them with astonishment, for they sought
vainly in their minds to know who this other person could be.

At this moment Planchet brought out Athos’s horse; the Musketeer leaped
lightly into the saddle.

“Wait for me,” cried he, “I will soon be back,” and he set off at a
gallop.

In a quarter of an hour he returned, accompanied by a tall man, masked,
and wrapped in a large red cloak.

Lord de Winter and the three Musketeers looked at one another
inquiringly. Neither could give the others any information, for all were
ignorant who this man could be; nevertheless, they felt convinced that
all was as it should be, as it was done by the order of Athos.

At nine o’clock, guided by Planchet, the little cavalcade set out,
taking the route the carriage had taken.

It was a melancholy sight--that of these six men, traveling in silence,
each plunged in his own thoughts, sad as despair, gloomy as
chastisement.




65 TRIAL


It was a stormy and dark night; vast clouds covered the heavens,
concealing the stars; the moon would not rise till midnight.

Occasionally, by the light of a flash of lightning which gleamed along
the horizon, the road stretched itself before them, white and solitary;
the flash extinct, all remained in darkness.

Every minute Athos was forced to restrain d’Artagnan, constantly in
advance of the little troop, and to beg him to keep in the line, which
in an instant he again departed from. He had but one thought--to go
forward; and he went.

They passed in silence through the little village of Festubert, where
the wounded servant was, and then skirted the wood of Richebourg. At
Herlier, Planchet, who led the column, turned to the left.

Several times Lord de Winter, Porthos, or Aramis tried to talk with the
man in the red cloak; but to every interrogation which they put to him
he bowed, without response. The travelers then comprehended that there
must be some reason why the unknown preserved such a silence, and ceased
to address themselves to him.

The storm increased, the flashes succeeded one another more rapidly, the
thunder began to growl, and the wind, the precursor of a hurricane,
whistled in the plumes and the hair of the horsemen.

The cavalcade trotted on more sharply.

A little before they came to Fromelles the storm burst. They spread
their cloaks. There remained three leagues to travel, and they did it
amid torrents of rain.

D’Artagnan took off his hat, and could not be persuaded to make use of
his cloak. He found pleasure in feeling the water trickle over his
burning brow and over his body, agitated by feverish shudders.

The moment the little troop passed Goskal and were approaching the Post,
a man sheltered beneath a tree detached himself from the trunk with
which he had been confounded in the darkness, and advanced into the
middle of the road, putting his finger on his lips.

Athos recognized Grimaud.

“What’s the manner?” cried Athos. “Has she left Armentieres?”

Grimaud made a sign in the affirmative. D’Artagnan ground his teeth.

“Silence, d’Artagnan!” said Athos. “I have charged myself with this
affair. It is for me, then, to interrogate Grimaud.”

“Where is she?” asked Athos.

Grimaud extended his hands in the direction of the Lys. “Far from here?”
asked Athos.

Grimaud showed his master his forefinger bent.

“Alone?” asked Athos.

Grimaud made the sign yes.

“Gentlemen,” said Athos, “she is alone within half a league of us, in
the direction of the river.”

“That’s well,” said d’Artagnan. “Lead us, Grimaud.”

Grimaud took his course across the country, and acted as guide to the
cavalcade.

At the end of five hundred paces, more or less, they came to a rivulet,
which they forded.

By the aid of the lightning they perceived the village of Erquinheim.

“Is she there, Grimaud?” asked Athos.

Grimaud shook his head negatively.

“Silence, then!” cried Athos.

And the troop continued their route.

Another flash illuminated all around them. Grimaud extended his arm, and
by the bluish splendor of the fiery serpent they distinguished a little
isolated house on the banks of the river, within a hundred paces of a
ferry.

One window was lighted.

“Here we are!” said Athos.

At this moment a man who had been crouching in a ditch jumped up and
came towards them. It was Mousqueton. He pointed his finger to the
lighted window.

“She is there,” said he.

“And Bazin?” asked Athos.

“While I watched the window, he guarded the door.”

“Good!” said Athos. “You are good and faithful servants.”

Athos sprang from his horse, gave the bridle to Grimaud, and advanced
toward the window, after having made a sign to the rest of the troop to
go toward the door.

The little house was surrounded by a low, quickset hedge, two or three
feet high. Athos sprang over the hedge and went up to the window, which
was without shutters, but had the half-curtains closely drawn.

He mounted the skirting stone that his eyes might look over the curtain.

By the light of a lamp he saw a woman, wrapped in a dark mantle, seated
upon a stool near a dying fire. Her elbows were placed upon a mean
table, and she leaned her head upon her two hands, which were white as
ivory.

He could not distinguish her countenance, but a sinister smile passed
over the lips of Athos. He was not deceived; it was she whom he sought.

At this moment a horse neighed. Milady raised her head, saw close to the
panes the pale face of Athos, and screamed.

Athos, perceiving that she knew him, pushed the window with his knee and
hand. The window yielded. The squares were broken to shivers; and Athos,
like the spectre of vengeance, leaped into the room.

Milady rushed to the door and opened it. More pale and menacing than
Athos, d’Artagnan stood on the threshold.

Milady recoiled, uttering a cry. D’Artagnan, believing she might have
means of flight and fearing she should escape, drew a pistol from his
belt; but Athos raised his hand.

“Put back that weapon, d’Artagnan!” said he; “this woman must be tried,
not assassinated. Wait an instant, my friend, and you shall be
satisfied. Come in, gentlemen.”

D’Artagnan obeyed; for Athos had the solemn voice and the powerful
gesture of a judge sent by the Lord himself. Behind d’Artagnan entered
Porthos, Aramis, Lord de Winter, and the man in the red cloak.

The four lackeys guarded the door and the window.

Milady had sunk into a chair, with her hands extended, as if to conjure
this terrible apparition. Perceiving her brother-in-law, she uttered a
terrible cry.

“What do you want?” screamed Milady.

“We want,” said Athos, “Charlotte Backson, who first was called Comtesse
de la Fere, and afterwards Milady de Winter, Baroness of Sheffield.”

“That is I! that is I!” murmured Milady, in extreme terror; “what do you
want?”

“We wish to judge you according to your crime,” said Athos; “you shall
be free to defend yourself. Justify yourself if you can. M. d’Artagnan,
it is for you to accuse her first.”

D’Artagnan advanced.

“Before God and before men,” said he, “I accuse this woman of having
poisoned Constance Bonacieux, who died yesterday evening.”

He turned towards Porthos and Aramis.

“We bear witness to this,” said the two Musketeers, with one voice.

D’Artagnan continued: “Before God and before men, I accuse this woman of
having attempted to poison me, in wine which she sent me from Villeroy,
with a forged letter, as if that wine came from my friends. God
preserved me, but a man named Brisemont died in my place.”

“We bear witness to this,” said Porthos and Aramis, in the same manner
as before.

“Before God and before men, I accuse this woman of having urged me to
the murder of the Baron de Wardes; but as no one else can attest the
truth of this accusation, I attest it myself. I have done.” And
d’Artagnan passed to the other side of the room with Porthos and Aramis.

“Your turn, my Lord,” said Athos.

The baron came forward.

“Before God and before men,” said he, “I accuse this woman of having
caused the assassination of the Duke of Buckingham.”

“The Duke of Buckingham assassinated!” cried all present, with one
voice.

“Yes,” said the baron, “assassinated. On receiving the warning letter
you wrote to me, I had this woman arrested, and gave her in charge to a
loyal servant. She corrupted this man; she placed the poniard in his
hand; she made him kill the duke. And at this moment, perhaps, Felton is
paying with his head for the crime of this fury!”

A shudder crept through the judges at the revelation of these unknown
crimes.

“That is not all,” resumed Lord de Winter. “My brother, who made you his
heir, died in three hours of a strange disorder which left livid traces
all over the body. My sister, how did your husband die?”

“Horror!” cried Porthos and Aramis.

“Assassin of Buckingham, assassin of Felton, assassin of my brother, I
demand justice upon you, and I swear that if it be not granted to me, I
will execute it myself.”

And Lord de Winter ranged himself by the side of d’Artagnan, leaving the
place free for another accuser.

Milady let her head sink between her two hands, and tried to recall her
ideas, whirling in a mortal vertigo.

“My turn,” said Athos, himself trembling as the lion trembles at the
sight of the serpent--“my turn. I married that woman when she was a
young girl; I married her in opposition to the wishes of all my family;
I gave her my wealth, I gave her my name; and one day I discovered that
this woman was branded--this woman was marked with a FLEUR-DE-LIS on her
left shoulder.”

“Oh,” said Milady, raising herself, “I defy you to find any tribunal
which pronounced that infamous sentence against me. I defy you to find
him who executed it.”

“Silence!” said a hollow voice. “It is for me to reply to that!” And the
man in the red cloak came forward in his turn.

“What man is that? What man is that?” cried Milady, suffocated by
terror, her hair loosening itself, and rising above her livid
countenance as if alive.

All eyes were turned towards this man--for to all except Athos he was
unknown.

Even Athos looked at him with as much stupefaction as the others, for he
knew not how he could in any way find himself mixed up with the horrible
drama then unfolded.

After approaching Milady with a slow and solemn step, so that the table
alone separated them, the unknown took off his mask.

Milady for some time examined with increasing terror that pale face,
framed with black hair and whiskers, the only expression of which was
icy impassibility. Then she suddenly cried, “Oh, no, no!” rising and
retreating to the very wall. “No, no! it is an infernal apparition! It
is not he! Help, help!” screamed she, turning towards the wall, as if
she would tear an opening with her hands.

“Who are you, then?” cried all the witnesses of this scene.

“Ask that woman,” said the man in the red cloak, “for you may plainly
see she knows me!”

“The executioner of Lille, the executioner of Lille!” cried Milady, a
prey to insensate terror, and clinging with her hands to the wall to
avoid falling.

Every one drew back, and the man in the red cloak remained standing
alone in the middle of the room.

“Oh, grace, grace, pardon!” cried the wretch, falling on her knees.

The unknown waited for silence, and then resumed, “I told you well that
she would know me. Yes, I am the executioner of Lille, and this is my
history.”

All eyes were fixed upon this man, whose words were listened to with
anxious attention.

“That woman was once a young girl, as beautiful as she is today. She was
a nun in the convent of the Benedictines of Templemar. A young priest,
with a simple and trustful heart, performed the duties of the church of
that convent. She undertook his seduction, and succeeded; she would have
seduced a saint.

“Their vows were sacred and irrevocable. Their connection could not last
long without ruining both. She prevailed upon him to leave the country;
but to leave the country, to fly together, to reach another part of
France, where they might live at ease because unknown, money was
necessary. Neither had any. The priest stole the sacred vases, and sold
them; but as they were preparing to escape together, they were both
arrested.

“Eight days later she had seduced the son of the jailer, and escaped.
The young priest was condemned to ten years of imprisonment, and to be
branded. I was executioner of the city of Lille, as this woman has said.
I was obliged to brand the guilty one; and he, gentlemen, was my
brother!

“I then swore that this woman who had ruined him, who was more than his
accomplice, since she had urged him to the crime, should at least share
his punishment. I suspected where she was concealed. I followed her, I
caught her, I bound her; and I imprinted the same disgraceful mark upon
her that I had imprinted upon my poor brother.

“The day after my return to Lille, my brother in his turn succeeded in
making his escape; I was accused of complicity, and was condemned to
remain in his place till he should be again a prisoner. My poor brother
was ignorant of this sentence. He rejoined this woman; they fled
together into Berry, and there he obtained a little curacy. This woman
passed for his sister.

“The Lord of the estate on which the chapel of the curacy was situated
saw this pretend sister, and became enamoured of her--amorous to such a
degree that he proposed to marry her. Then she quitted him she had
ruined for him she was destined to ruin, and became the Comtesse de la
Fere--”

All eyes were turned towards Athos, whose real name that was, and who
made a sign with his head that all was true which the executioner had
said.

“Then,” resumed he, “mad, desperate, determined to get rid of an
existence from which she had stolen everything, honor and happiness, my
poor brother returned to Lille, and learning the sentence which had
condemned me in his place, surrendered himself, and hanged himself that
same night from the iron bar of the loophole of his prison.

“To do justice to them who had condemned me, they kept their word. As
soon as the identity of my brother was proved, I was set at liberty.

“That is the crime of which I accuse her; that is the cause for which
she was branded.”

“Monsieur d’Artagnan,” said Athos, “what is the penalty you demand
against this woman?”

“The punishment of death,” replied d’Artagnan.

“My Lord de Winter,” continued Athos, “what is the penalty you demand
against this woman?”

“The punishment of death,” replied Lord de Winter.

“Messieurs Porthos and Aramis,” repeated Athos, “you who are her judges,
what is the sentence you pronounce upon this woman?”

“The punishment of death,” replied the Musketeers, in a hollow voice.

Milady uttered a frightful shriek, and dragged herself along several
paces upon her knees toward her judges.

Athos stretched out his hand toward her.

“Charlotte Backson, Comtesse de la Fere, Milady de Winter,” said he,
“your crimes have wearied men on earth and God in heaven. If you know a
prayer, say it--for you are condemned, and you shall die.”

At these words, which left no hope, Milady raised herself in all her
pride, and wished to speak; but her strength failed her. She felt that a
powerful and implacable hand seized her by the hair, and dragged her
away as irrevocably as fatality drags humanity. She did not, therefore,
even attempt the least resistance, and went out of the cottage.

Lord de Winter, d’Artagnan, Athos, Porthos, and Aramis, went out close
behind her. The lackeys followed their masters, and the chamber was left
solitary, with its broken window, its open door, and its smoky lamp
burning sadly on the table.




66 EXECUTION


It was near midnight; the moon, lessened by its decline, and reddened by
the last traces of the storm, arose behind the little town of
Armentieres, which showed against its pale light the dark outline of its
houses, and the skeleton of its high belfry. In front of them the Lys
rolled its waters like a river of molten tin; while on the other side
was a black mass of trees, profiled on a stormy sky, invaded by large
coppery clouds which created a sort of twilight amid the night. On the
left was an old abandoned mill, with its motionless wings, from the
ruins of which an owl threw out its shrill, periodical, and monotonous
cry. On the right and on the left of the road, which the dismal
procession pursued, appeared a few low, stunted trees, which looked like
deformed dwarfs crouching down to watch men traveling at this sinister
hour.

From time to time a broad sheet of lightning opened the horizon in its
whole width, darted like a serpent over the black mass of trees, and
like a terrible scimitar divided the heavens and the waters into two
parts. Not a breath of wind now disturbed the heavy atmosphere. A
deathlike silence oppressed all nature. The soil was humid and
glittering with the rain which had recently fallen, and the refreshed
herbs sent forth their perfume with additional energy.

Two lackeys dragged Milady, whom each held by one arm. The executioner
walked behind them, and Lord de Winter, d’Artagnan, Porthos, and Aramis
walked behind the executioner. Planchet and Bazin came last.

The two lackeys conducted Milady to the bank of the river. Her mouth was
mute; but her eyes spoke with their inexpressible eloquence,
supplicating by turns each of those on whom she looked.

Being a few paces in advance she whispered to the lackeys, “A thousand
pistoles to each of you, if you will assist my escape; but if you
deliver me up to your masters, I have near at hand avengers who will
make you pay dearly for my death.”

Grimaud hesitated. Mousqueton trembled in all his members.

Athos, who heard Milady’s voice, came sharply up. Lord de Winter did the
same.

“Change these lackeys,” said he; “she has spoken to them. They are no
longer sure.”

Planchet and Bazin were called, and took the places of Grimaud and
Mousqueton.

On the bank of the river the executioner approached Milady, and bound
her hands and feet.

Then she broke the silence to cry out, “You are cowards, miserable
assassins--ten men combined to murder one woman. Beware! If I am not
saved I shall be avenged.”

“You are not a woman,” said Athos, coldly and sternly. “You do not
belong to the human species; you are a demon escaped from hell, whither
we send you back again.”

“Ah, you virtuous men!” said Milady; “please to remember that he who
shall touch a hair of my head is himself an assassin.”

“The executioner may kill, without being on that account an assassin,”
said the man in the red cloak, rapping upon his immense sword. “This is
the last judge; that is all. NACHRICHTER, as say our neighbors, the
Germans.”

And as he bound her while saying these words, Milady uttered two or
three savage cries, which produced a strange and melancholy effect in
flying away into the night, and losing themselves in the depths of the
woods.

“If I am guilty, if I have committed the crimes you accuse me of,”
shrieked Milady, “take me before a tribunal. You are not judges! You
cannot condemn me!”

“I offered you Tyburn,” said Lord de Winter. “Why did you not accept
it?”

“Because I am not willing to die!” cried Milady, struggling. “Because I
am too young to die!”

“The woman you poisoned at Bethune was still younger than you, madame,
and yet she is dead,” said d’Artagnan.

“I will enter a cloister; I will become a nun,” said Milady.

“You were in a cloister,” said the executioner, “and you left it to ruin
my brother.”

Milady uttered a cry of terror and sank upon her knees. The executioner
took her up in his arms and was carrying her toward the boat.

“Oh, my God!” cried she, “my God! are you going to drown me?”

These cries had something so heartrending in them that M. d’Artagnan,
who had been at first the most eager in pursuit of Milady, sat down on
the stump of a tree and hung his head, covering his ears with the palms
of his hands; and yet, notwithstanding, he could still hear her cry and
threaten.

D’Artagnan was the youngest of all these men. His heart failed him.

“Oh, I cannot behold this frightful spectacle!” said he. “I cannot
consent that this woman should die thus!”

Milady heard these few words and caught at a shadow of hope.

“d’Artagnan, d’Artagnan!” cried she; “remember that I loved you!”

The young man rose and took a step toward her.

But Athos rose likewise, drew his sword, and placed himself in the way.

“If you take one step farther, d’Artagnan,” said he, “we shall cross
swords together.”

D’Artagnan sank on his knees and prayed.

“Come,” continued Athos, “executioner, do your duty.”

“Willingly, monseigneur,” said the executioner; “for as I am a good
Catholic, I firmly believe I am acting justly in performing my functions
on this woman.”

“That’s well.”

Athos made a step toward Milady.

“I pardon you,” said he, “the ill you have done me. I pardon you for my
blasted future, my lost honor, my defiled love, and my salvation forever
compromised by the despair into which you have cast me. Die in peace!”

Lord de Winter advanced in his turn.

“I pardon you,” said he, “for the poisoning of my brother, and the
assassination of his Grace, Lord Buckingham. I pardon you for the death
of poor Felton; I pardon you for the attempts upon my own person. Die in
peace!”

“And I,” said M. d’Artagnan. “Pardon me, madame, for having by a trick
unworthy of a gentleman provoked your anger; and I, in exchange, pardon
you the murder of my poor love and your cruel vengeance against me. I
pardon you, and I weep for you. Die in peace!”

“I am lost!” murmured Milady in English. “I must die!”

Then she arose of herself, and cast around her one of those piercing
looks which seemed to dart from an eye of flame.

She saw nothing; she listened, and she heard nothing.

“Where am I to die?” said she.

“On the other bank,” replied the executioner.

Then he placed her in the boat, and as he was going to set foot in it
himself, Athos handed him a sum of silver.

“Here,” said he, “is the price of the execution, that it may be plain we
act as judges.”

“That is correct,” said the executioner; “and now in her turn, let this
woman see that I am not fulfilling my trade, but my debt.”

And he threw the money into the river.

The boat moved off toward the left-hand shore of the Lys, bearing the
guilty woman and the executioner; all the others remained on the
right-hand bank, where they fell on their knees.

The boat glided along the ferry rope under the shadow of a pale cloud
which hung over the water at that moment.

The troop of friends saw it gain the opposite bank; the figures were
defined like black shadows on the red-tinted horizon.

Milady, during the passage had contrived to untie the cord which
fastened her feet. On coming near the bank, she jumped lightly on shore
and took to flight. But the soil was moist; on reaching the top of the
bank, she slipped and fell upon her knees.

She was struck, no doubt, with a superstitious idea; she conceived that
heaven denied its aid, and she remained in the attitude in which she had
fallen, her head drooping and her hands clasped.

Then they saw from the other bank the executioner raise both his arms
slowly; a moonbeam fell upon the blade of the large sword. The two arms
fell with a sudden force; they heard the hissing of the scimitar and the
cry of the victim, then a truncated mass sank beneath the blow.

The executioner then took off his red cloak, spread it upon the ground,
laid the body in it, threw in the head, tied all up by the four corners,
lifted it on his back, and entered the boat again.

In the middle of the stream he stopped the boat, and suspending his
burden over the water cried in a loud voice, “Let the justice of God be
done!” and he let the corpse drop into the depths of the waters, which
closed over it.

Three days afterward the four Musketeers were in Paris; they had not
exceeded their leave of absence, and that same evening they went to pay
their customary visit to M. de Treville.

“Well, gentlemen,” said the brave captain, “I hope you have been well
amused during your excursion.”

“Prodigiously,” replied Athos in the name of himself and his comrades.




67 CONCLUSION


On the sixth of the following month the king, in compliance with the
promise he had made the cardinal to return to La Rochelle, left his
capital still in amazement at the news which began to spread itself of
Buckingham’s assassination.

Although warned that the man she had loved so much was in great danger,
the queen, when his death was announced to her, would not believe the
fact, and even imprudently exclaimed, “it is false; he has just written
to me!”

But the next day she was obliged to believe this fatal intelligence;
Laporte, detained in England, as everyone else had been, by the orders
of Charles I, arrived, and was the bearer of the duke’s dying gift to
the queen.

The joy of the king was lively. He did not even give himself the trouble
to dissemble, and displayed it with affectation before the queen. Louis
XIII, like every weak mind, was wanting in generosity.

But the king soon again became dull and indisposed; his brow was not one
of those that long remain clear. He felt that in returning to camp he
should re-enter slavery; nevertheless, he did return.

The cardinal was for him the fascinating serpent, and himself the bird
which flies from branch to branch without power to escape.

The return to La Rochelle, therefore, was profoundly dull. Our four
friends, in particular, astonished their comrades; they traveled
together, side by side, with sad eyes and heads lowered. Athos alone
from time to time raised his expansive brow; a flash kindled in his
eyes, and a bitter smile passed over his lips, then, like his comrades,
he sank again into reverie.

As soon as the escort arrived in a city, when they had conducted the
king to his quarters the four friends either retired to their own or to
some secluded cabaret, where they neither drank nor played; they only
conversed in a low voice, looking around attentively to see that no one
overheard them.

One day, when the king had halted to fly the magpie, and the four
friends, according to their custom, instead of following the sport had
stopped at a cabaret on the high road, a man coming from la Rochelle on
horseback pulled up at the door to drink a glass of wine, and darted a
searching glance into the room where the four Musketeers were sitting.

“Holloa, Monsieur d’Artagnan!” said he, “is not that you whom I see
yonder?”

D’Artagnan raised his head and uttered a cry of joy. It was the man he
called his phantom; it was his stranger of Meung, of the Rue des
Fossoyeurs and of Arras.

D’Artagnan drew his sword, and sprang toward the door.

But this time, instead of avoiding him the stranger jumped from his
horse, and advanced to meet d’Artagnan.

“Ah, monsieur!” said the young man, “I meet you, then, at last! This
time you shall not escape me!”

“Neither is it my intention, monsieur, for this time I was seeking you;
in the name of the king, I arrest you.”

“How! what do you say?” cried d’Artagnan.

“I say that you must surrender your sword to me, monsieur, and that
without resistance. This concerns your head, I warn you.”

“Who are you, then?” demanded d’Artagnan, lowering the point of his
sword, but without yet surrendering it.

“I am the Chevalier de Rochefort,” answered the other, “the equerry of
Monsieur le Cardinal Richelieu, and I have orders to conduct you to his
Eminence.”

“We are returning to his Eminence, monsieur the Chevalier,” said Athos,
advancing; “and you will please to accept the word of Monsieur
d’Artagnan that he will go straight to La Rochelle.”

“I must place him in the hands of guards who will take him into camp.”

“We will be his guards, monsieur, upon our word as gentlemen; but
likewise, upon our word as gentlemen,” added Athos, knitting his brow,
“Monsieur d’Artagnan shall not leave us.”

The Chevalier de Rochefort cast a glance backward, and saw that Porthos
and Aramis had placed themselves between him and the gate; he understood
that he was completely at the mercy of these four men.

“Gentlemen,” said he, “if Monsieur d’Artagnan will surrender his sword
to me and join his word to yours, I shall be satisfied with your promise
to convey Monsieur d’Artagnan to the quarters of Monseigneur the
Cardinal.”

“You have my word, monsieur, and here is my sword.”

“This suits me the better,” said Rochefort, “as I wish to continue my
journey.”

“If it is for the purpose of rejoining Milady,” said Athos, coolly, “it
is useless; you will not find her.”

“What has become of her, then?” asked Rochefort, eagerly.

“Return to camp and you shall know.”

Rochefort remained for a moment in thought; then, as they were only a
day’s journey from Surgeres, whither the cardinal was to come to meet
the king, he resolved to follow the advice of Athos and go with them.
Besides, this return offered him the advantage of watching his prisoner.

They resumed their route.

On the morrow, at three o’clock in the afternoon, they arrived at
Surgeres. The cardinal there awaited Louis XIII. The minister and the
king exchanged numerous caresses, felicitating each other upon the
fortunate chance which had freed France from the inveterate enemy who
set all Europe against her. After which, the cardinal, who had been
informed that d’Artagnan was arrested and who was anxious to see him,
took leave of the king, inviting him to come the next day to view the
work already done upon the dyke.

On returning in the evening to his quarters at the bridge of La Pierre,
the cardinal found, standing before the house he occupied, d’Artagnan,
without his sword, and the three Musketeers armed.

This time, as he was well attended, he looked at them sternly, and made
a sign with his eye and hand for d’Artagnan to follow him.

D’Artagnan obeyed.

“We shall wait for you, d’Artagnan,” said Athos, loud enough for the
cardinal to hear him.

His Eminence bent his brow, stopped for an instant, and then kept on his
way without uttering a single word.

D’Artagnan entered after the cardinal, and behind d’Artagnan the door
was guarded.

His Eminence entered the chamber which served him as a study, and made a
sign to Rochefort to bring in the young Musketeer.

Rochefort obeyed and retired.

D’Artagnan remained alone in front of the cardinal; this was his second
interview with Richelieu, and he afterward confessed that he felt well
assured it would be his last.

Richelieu remained standing, leaning against the mantelpiece; a table
was between him and d’Artagnan.

“Monsieur,” said the cardinal, “you have been arrested by my orders.”

“So they tell me, monseigneur.”

“Do you know why?”

“No, monseigneur, for the only thing for which I could be arrested is
still unknown to your Eminence.”

Richelieu looked steadfastly at the young man.

“Holloa!” said he, “what does that mean?”

“If Monseigneur will have the goodness to tell me, in the first place,
what crimes are imputed to me, I will then tell him the deeds I have
really done.”

“Crimes are imputed to you which had brought down far loftier heads than
yours, monsieur,” said the cardinal.

“What, monseigneur?” said d’Artagnan, with a calmness which astonished
the cardinal himself.

“You are charged with having corresponded with the enemies of the
kingdom; you are charged with having surprised state secrets; you are
charged with having tried to thwart the plans of your general.”

“And who charges me with this, monseigneur?” said d’Artagnan, who had no
doubt the accusation came from Milady, “a woman branded by the justice
of the country; a woman who has espoused one man in France and another
in England; a woman who poisoned her second husband and who attempted
both to poison and assassinate me!”

“What do you say, monsieur?” cried the cardinal, astonished; “and of
what woman are you speaking thus?”

“Of Milady de Winter,” replied d’Artagnan, “yes, of Milady de Winter, of
whose crimes your Eminence is doubtless ignorant, since you have honored
her with your confidence.”

“Monsieur,” said the cardinal, “if Milady de Winter has committed the
crimes you lay to her charge, she shall be punished.”

“She has been punished, monseigneur.”

“And who has punished her?”

“We.”

“She is in prison?”

“She is dead.”

“Dead!” repeated the cardinal, who could not believe what he heard,
“dead! Did you not say she was dead?”

“Three times she attempted to kill me, and I pardoned her; but she
murdered the woman I loved. Then my friends and I took her, tried her,
and condemned her.”

D’Artagnan then related the poisoning of Mme. Bonacieux in the convent
of the Carmelites at Bethune, the trial in the isolated house, and the
execution on the banks of the Lys.

A shudder crept through the body of the cardinal, who did not shudder
readily.

But all at once, as if undergoing the influence of an unspoken thought,
the countenance of the cardinal, till then gloomy, cleared up by
degrees, and recovered perfect serenity.

“So,” said the cardinal, in a tone that contrasted strongly with the
severity of his words, “you have constituted yourselves judges, without
remembering that they who punish without license to punish are
assassins?”

“Monseigneur, I swear to you that I never for an instant had the
intention of defending my head against you. I willingly submit to any
punishment your Eminence may please to inflict upon me. I do not hold
life dear enough to be afraid of death.”

“Yes, I know you are a man of a stout heart, monsieur,” said the
cardinal, with a voice almost affectionate; “I can therefore tell you
beforehand you shall be tried, and even condemned.”

“Another might reply to your Eminence that he had his pardon in his
pocket. I content myself with saying: Command, monseigneur; I am ready.”

“Your pardon?” said Richelieu, surprised.

“Yes, monseigneur,” said d’Artagnan.

“And signed by whom--by the king?” And the cardinal pronounced these
words with a singular expression of contempt.

“No, by your Eminence.”

“By me? You are insane, monsieur.”

“Monseigneur will doubtless recognize his own handwriting.”

And d’Artagnan presented to the cardinal the precious piece of paper
which Athos had forced from Milady, and which he had given to d’Artagnan
to serve him as a safeguard.

His Eminence took the paper, and read in a slow voice, dwelling upon
every syllable:

“Dec. 3, 1627

“It is by my order and for the good of the state that the bearer of this
has done what he has done.

“RICHELIEU”

The cardinal, after having read these two lines, sank into a profound
reverie; but he did not return the paper to d’Artagnan.

“He is meditating by what sort of punishment he shall cause me to die,”
said the Gascon to himself. “Well, my faith! he shall see how a
gentleman can die.”

The young Musketeer was in excellent disposition to die heroically.

Richelieu still continued thinking, rolling and unrolling the paper in
his hands.

At length he raised his head, fixed his eagle look upon that loyal,
open, and intelligent countenance, read upon that face, furrowed with
tears, all the sufferings its possessor had endured in the course of a
month, and reflected for the third or fourth time how much there was in
that youth of twenty-one years before him, and what resources his
activity, his courage, and his shrewdness might offer to a good master.
On the other side, the crimes, the power, and the infernal genius of
Milady had more than once terrified him. He felt something like a secret
joy at being forever relieved of this dangerous accomplice.

Richelieu slowly tore the paper which d’Artagnan had generously
relinquished.

“I am lost!” said d’Artagnan to himself. And he bowed profoundly before
the cardinal, like a man who says, “Lord, Thy will be done!”

The cardinal approached the table, and without sitting down, wrote a few
lines upon a parchment of which two-thirds were already filled, and
affixed his seal.

“That is my condemnation,” thought d’Artagnan; “he will spare me the
ENNUI of the Bastille, or the tediousness of a trial. That’s very kind
of him.”

“Here, monsieur,” said the cardinal to the young man. “I have taken from
you one CARTE BLANCHE to give you another. The name is wanting in this
commission; you can write it yourself.”

D’Artagnan took the paper hesitatingly and cast his eyes over it; it was
a lieutenant’s commission in the Musketeers.

D’Artagnan fell at the feet of the cardinal.

“Monseigneur,” said he, “my life is yours; henceforth dispose of it. But
this favor which you bestow upon me I do not merit. I have three friends
who are more meritorious and more worthy--”

“You are a brave youth, d’Artagnan,” interrupted the cardinal, tapping
him familiarly on the shoulder, charmed at having vanquished this
rebellious nature. “Do with this commission what you will; only
remember, though the name be blank, it is to you I give it.”

“I shall never forget it,” replied d’Artagnan. “Your Eminence may be
certain of that.”

The cardinal turned and said in a loud voice, “Rochefort!” The
chevalier, who no doubt was near the door, entered immediately.

“Rochefort,” said the cardinal, “you see Monsieur d’Artagnan. I receive
him among the number of my friends. Greet each other, then; and be wise
if you wish to preserve your heads.”

Rochefort and d’Artagnan coolly greeted each other with their lips; but
the cardinal was there, observing them with his vigilant eye.

They left the chamber at the same time.

“We shall meet again, shall we not, monsieur?”

“When you please,” said d’Artagnan.

“An opportunity will come,” replied Rochefort.

“Hey?” said the cardinal, opening the door.

The two men smiled at each other, shook hands, and saluted his Eminence.

“We were beginning to grow impatient,” said Athos.

“Here I am, my friends,” replied d’Artagnan; “not only free, but in
favor.”

“Tell us about it.”

“This evening; but for the moment, let us separate.”

Accordingly, that same evening d’Artagnan repaired to the quarters of
Athos, whom he found in a fair way to empty a bottle of Spanish wine--an
occupation which he religiously accomplished every night.

D’Artagnan related what had taken place between the cardinal and
himself, and drawing the commission from his pocket, said, “Here, my
dear Athos, this naturally belongs to you.”

Athos smiled with one of his sweet and expressive smiles.

“Friend,” said he, “for Athos this is too much; for the Comte de la Fere
it is too little. Keep the commission; it is yours. Alas! you have
purchased it dearly enough.”

D’Artagnan left Athos’s chamber and went to that of Porthos. He found
him clothed in a magnificent dress covered with splendid embroidery,
admiring himself before a glass.

“Ah, ah! is that you, dear friend?” exclaimed Porthos. “How do you think
these garments fit me?”

“Wonderfully,” said d’Artagnan; “but I come to offer you a dress which
will become you still better.”

“What?” asked Porthos.

“That of a lieutenant of Musketeers.”

D’Artagnan related to Porthos the substance of his interview with the
cardinal, and said, taking the commission from his pocket, “Here, my
friend, write your name upon it and become my chief.”

Porthos cast his eyes over the commission and returned it to d’Artagnan,
to the great astonishment of the young man.

“Yes,” said he, “yes, that would flatter me very much; but I should not
have time enough to enjoy the distinction. During our expedition to
Bethune the husband of my duchess died; so, my dear, the coffer of the
defunct holding out its arms to me, I shall marry the widow. Look here!
I was trying on my wedding suit. Keep the lieutenancy, my dear, keep
it.”

The young man then entered the apartment of Aramis. He found him
kneeling before a PRIEDIEU with his head leaning on an open prayer book.

He described to him his interview with the cardinal, and said, for the
third time drawing his commission from his pocket, “You, our friend, our
intelligence, our invisible protector, accept this commission. You have
merited it more than any of us by your wisdom and your counsels, always
followed by such happy results.”

“Alas, dear friend!” said Aramis, “our late adventures have disgusted me
with military life. This time my determination is irrevocably taken.
After the siege I shall enter the house of the Lazarists. Keep the
commission, d’Artagnan; the profession of arms suits you. You will be a
brave and adventurous captain.”

D’Artagnan, his eye moist with gratitude though beaming with joy, went
back to Athos, whom he found still at table contemplating the charms of
his last glass of Malaga by the light of his lamp.

“Well,” said he, “they likewise have refused me.”

“That, dear friend, is because nobody is more worthy than yourself.”

He took a quill, wrote the name of d’Artagnan in the commission, and
returned it to him.

“I shall then have no more friends,” said the young man. “Alas! nothing
but bitter recollections.”

And he let his head sink upon his hands, while two large tears rolled
down his cheeks.

“You are young,” replied Athos; “and your bitter recollections have time
to change themselves into sweet remembrances.”




EPILOGUE


La Rochelle, deprived of the assistance of the English fleet and of the
diversion promised by Buckingham, surrendered after a siege of a year.
On the twenty-eighth of October, 1628, the capitulation was signed.

The king made his entrance into Paris on the twenty-third of December of
the same year. He was received in triumph, as if he came from conquering
an enemy and not Frenchmen. He entered by the Faubourg St. Jacques,
under verdant arches.

D’Artagnan took possession of his command. Porthos left the service, and
in the course of the following year married Mme. Coquenard; the coffer
so much coveted contained eight hundred thousand livres.

Mousqueton had a magnificent livery, and enjoyed the satisfaction of
which he had been ambitious all his life--that of standing behind a
gilded carriage.

Aramis, after a journey into Lorraine, disappeared all at once, and
ceased to write to his friends; they learned at a later period through
Mme. de Chevreuse, who told it to two or three of her intimates, that,
yielding to his vocation, he had retired into a convent--only into
which, nobody knew.

Bazin became a lay brother.

Athos remained a Musketeer under the command of d’Artagnan till the year
1633, at which period, after a journey he made to Touraine, he also quit
the service, under the pretext of having inherited a small property in
Roussillon.

Grimaud followed Athos.

D’Artagnan fought three times with Rochefort, and wounded him three
times.

“I shall probably kill you the fourth,” said he to him, holding out his
hand to assist him to rise.

“It is much better both for you and for me to stop where we are,”
answered the wounded man. “CORBLEU--I am more your friend than you
think--for after our very first encounter, I could by saying a word to
the cardinal have had your throat cut!”

They this time embraced heartily, and without retaining any malice.

Planchet obtained from Rochefort the rank of sergeant in the Piedmont
regiment.

M Bonacieux lived on very quietly, wholly ignorant of what had become of
his wife, and caring very little about it. One day he had the imprudence
to recall himself to the memory of the cardinal. The cardinal had him
informed that he would provide for him so that he should never want for
anything in future. In fact, M. Bonacieux, having left his house at
seven o’clock in the evening to go to the Louvre, never appeared again
in the Rue des Fossoyeurs; the opinion of those who seemed to be best
informed was that he was fed and lodged in some royal castle, at the
expense of his generous Eminence.

Chapter I. In which D’Artagnan finishes by at Length placing his Hand
upon his Captain’s Commission.

The reader guesses beforehand whom the usher preceded in announcing
the courier from Bretagne. This messenger was easily recognized. It was
D’Artagnan, his clothes dusty, his face inflamed, his hair dripping with
sweat, his legs stiff; he lifted his feet painfully at every step, on
which resounded the clink of his blood-stained spurs. He perceived
in the doorway he was passing through, the superintendent coming out.
Fouquet bowed with a smile to him who, an hour before, was bringing him
ruin and death. D’Artagnan found in his goodness of heart, and in his
inexhaustible vigor of body, enough presence of mind to remember
the kind reception of this man; he bowed then, also, much more from
benevolence and compassion, than from respect. He felt upon his lips the
word which had so many times been repeated to the Duc de Guise: “Fly.”
 But to pronounce that word would have been to betray his cause; to speak
that word in the cabinet of the king, and before an usher, would have
been to ruin himself gratuitously, and could save nobody. D’Artagnan
then, contented himself with bowing to Fouquet and entered. At this
moment the king floated between the joy the last words of Fouquet had
given him, and his pleasure at the return of D’Artagnan. Without being a
courtier, D’Artagnan had a glance as sure and as rapid as if he had been
one. He read, on his entrance, devouring humiliation on the countenance
of Colbert. He even heard the king say these words to him:--

“Ah! Monsieur Colbert; you have then nine hundred thousand livres at
the intendance?” Colbert, suffocated, bowed but made no reply. All this
scene entered into the mind of D’Artagnan, by the eyes and ears, at
once.

The first word of Louis to his musketeer, as if he wished it to contrast
with what he was saying at the moment, was a kind “good day.” His second
was to send away Colbert. The latter left the king’s cabinet, pallid and
tottering, whilst D’Artagnan twisted up the ends of his mustache.

“I love to see one of my servants in this disorder,” said the king,
admiring the martial stains upon the clothes of his envoy.

“I thought, sire, my presence at the Louvre was sufficiently urgent to
excuse my presenting myself thus before you.”

“You bring me great news, then, monsieur?”

“Sire, the thing is this, in two words: Belle-Isle is fortified,
admirably fortified; Belle-Isle has a double _enceinte_, a citadel, two
detached forts; its ports contain three corsairs; and the side batteries
only await their cannon.”

“I know all that, monsieur,” replied the king.

“What! your majesty knows all that?” replied the musketeer, stupefied.

“I have the plan of the fortifications of Belle-Isle,” said the king.

“Your majesty has the plan?”

“Here it is.”

“It is really correct, sire: I saw a similar one on the spot.”

D’Artagnan’s brow became clouded.

“Ah! I understand all. Your majesty did not trust to me alone, but sent
some other person,” said he in a reproachful tone.

“Of what importance is the manner, monsieur, in which I have learnt what
I know, so that I know it?”

“Sire, sire,” said the musketeer, without seeking even to conceal his
dissatisfaction; “but I must be permitted to say to your majesty, that
it is not worth while to make me use such speed, to risk twenty
times the breaking of my neck, to salute me on my arrival with
such intelligence. Sire, when people are not trusted, or are deemed
insufficient, they should scarcely be employed.” And D’Artagnan, with
a movement perfectly military, stamped with his foot, and left upon the
floor dust stained with blood. The king looked at him, inwardly enjoying
his first triumph.

“Monsieur,” said he, at the expiration of a minute, “not only is
Belle-Isle known to me, but, still further, Belle-Isle is mine.”

“That is well! that is well, sire, I ask but one thing more,” replied
D’Artagnan.--“My discharge.”

“What! your discharge?”

“Without doubt I am too proud to eat the bread of the king without
earning it, or rather by gaining it badly.--My discharge, sire!”

“Oh, oh!”

“I ask for my discharge, or I will take it.”

“You are angry, monsieur?”

“I have reason, _mordioux!_ Thirty-two hours in the saddle, I ride day
and night, I perform prodigies of speed, I arrive stiff as the corpse of
a man who has been hung--and another arrives before me! Come, sire, I am
a fool!--My discharge, sire!”

“Monsieur d’Artagnan,” said Louis, leaning his white hand upon the dusty
arm of the musketeer, “what I tell you will not at all affect that which
I promised you. A king’s word given must be kept.” And the king going
straight to his table, opened a drawer, and took out a folded paper.
“Here is your commission of captain of musketeers; you have won it,
Monsieur d’Artagnan.”

D’Artagnan opened the paper eagerly, and scanned it twice. He could
scarcely believe his eyes.

“And this commission is given you,” continued the king, “not only on
account of your journey to Belle-Isle but, moreover, for your brave
intervention at the Place de Greve. There, likewise, you served me
valiantly.”

“Ah, ah!” said D’Artagnan, without his self-command being able to
prevent a blush from mounting to his eyes--“you know that also, sire?”

“Yes, I know it.”

The king possessed a piercing glance and an infallible judgment when it
was his object to read men’s minds. “You have something to say,” said
he to the musketeer, “something to say which you do not say. Come, speak
freely, monsieur; you know that I told you, once and for all, that you
are to be always quite frank with me.”

“Well, sire! what I have to say is this, that I would prefer being made
captain of the musketeers for having charged a battery at the head of my
company, or taken a city, than for causing two wretches to be hung.”

“Is this quite true you tell me?”

“And why should your majesty suspect me of dissimulation, I ask?”

“Because I have known you well, monsieur; you cannot repent of having
drawn your sword for me.”

“Well, in that your majesty is deceived, and greatly; yes, I do repent
of having drawn my sword on account of the results that action produced;
the poor men who were hung, sire, were neither your enemies nor mine;
and they could not defend themselves.”

The king preserved silence for a moment. “And your companion, M.
d’Artagnan, does he partake of your repentance?”

“My companion?”

“Yes, you were not alone, I have been told.”

“Alone, where?”

“At the Place de Greve.”

“No, sire, no,” said D’Artagnan, blushing at the idea that the king
might have a suspicion that he, D’Artagnan, had wished to engross to
himself all the glory that belonged to Raoul; “no, _mordioux!_ and as
your majesty says, I had a companion, and a good companion, too.”

“A young man?”

“Yes, sire; a young man. Oh! your majesty must accept my compliments,
you are as well informed of things out of doors as things within. It is
M. Colbert who makes all these fine reports to the king.”

“M. Colbert has said nothing but good of you, M. d’Artagnan, and he
would have met with a bad reception if he had come to tell me anything
else.”

“That is fortunate!”

“But he also said much good of that young man.”

“And with justice,” said the musketeer.

“In short, it appears that this young man is a fire-eater,” said Louis,
in order to sharpen the sentiment which he mistook for envy.

“A fire-eater! Yes, sire,” repeated D’Artagnan, delighted on his part to
direct the king’s attention to Raoul.

“Do you not know his name?”

“Well, I think--”

“You know him then?”

“I have known him nearly five-and-twenty years, sire.”

“Why, he is scarcely twenty-five years old!” cried the king.

“Well, sire! I have known him ever since he was born, that is all.”

“Do you affirm that?”

“Sire,” said D’Artagnan, “your majesty questions me with a mistrust in
which I recognize another character than your own. M. Colbert, who has
so well informed you, has he not forgotten to tell you that this young
man is the son of my most intimate friend?”

“The Vicomte de Bragelonne?”

“Certainly, sire. The father of the Vicomte de Bragelonne is M. le
Comte de la Fere, who so powerfully assisted in the restoration of King
Charles II. Bragelonne comes of a valiant race, sire.”

“Then he is the son of that nobleman who came to me, or rather to M.
Mazarin, on the part of King Charles II., to offer me his alliance?”

“Exactly, sire.”

“And the Comte de la Fere is a great soldier, say you?”

“Sire, he is a man who has drawn his sword more times for the king, your
father, than there are, at present, months in the happy life of your
majesty.”

It was Louis XIV. who now bit his lip.

“That is well, M. d’Artagnan, very well! And M. le Comte de la Fere is
your friend, say you?”

“For about forty years; yes, sire. Your majesty may see that I do not
speak to you of yesterday.”

“Should you be glad to see this young man, M. d’Artagnan?”

“Delighted, sire.”

The king touched his bell, and an usher appeared. “Call M. de
Bragelonne,” said the king.

“Ah! ah! he is here?” said D’Artagnan.

“He is on guard to-day, at the Louvre, with the company of the gentlemen
of monsieur le prince.”

The king had scarcely ceased speaking, when Raoul presented himself,
and, on seeing D’Artagnan, smiled on him with that charming smile which
is only found upon the lips of youth.

“Come, come,” said D’Artagnan, familiarly, to Raoul, “the king will
allow you to embrace me; only tell his majesty you thank him.”

Raoul bowed so gracefully, that Louis, to whom all superior qualities
were pleasing when they did not overshadow his own, admired his beauty,
strength, and modesty.

“Monsieur,” said the king, addressing Raoul, “I have asked monsieur
le prince to be kind enough to give you up to me; I have received his
reply, and you belong to me from this morning. Monsieur le prince was a
good master, but I hope you will not lose by the exchange.”

“Yes, yes, Raoul, be satisfied; the king has some good in him,” said
D’Artagnan, who had fathomed the character of Louis, and who played
with his self-love, within certain limits; always observing, be it
understood, the proprieties and flattering, even when he appeared to be
bantering.

“Sire,” said Bragelonne, with voice soft and musical, and with the
natural and easy elocution he inherited from his father; “Sire, it is
not from to-day that I belong to your majesty.”

“Oh! no, I know,” said the king, “you mean your enterprise of the Greve.
That day, you were truly mine, monsieur.”

“Sire, it is not of that day I would speak; it would not become me
to refer to so paltry a service in the presence of such a man as M.
d’Artagnan. I would speak of a circumstance which created an epoch in my
life, and which consecrated me, from the age of sixteen, to the devoted
service of your majesty.”

“Ah! ah!” said the king, “what was that circumstance? Tell me,
monsieur.”

“This is it, sire.--When I was setting out on my first campaign, that is
to say, to join the army of monsieur le prince, M. le Comte de la Fere
came to conduct me as far as Saint-Denis, where the remains of King
Louis XIII. wait, upon the lowest steps of the funeral _basilique_, a
successor, whom God will not send him, I hope, for many years. Then
he made me swear upon the ashes of our masters, to serve royalty,
represented by you--incarnate in you, sire--to serve it in word, in
thought, and in action. I swore, and God and the dead were witnesses to
my oath. During ten years, sire, I have not so often as I desired had
occasion to keep it. I am a soldier of your majesty, and nothing else;
and, on calling me nearer to you, I do not change my master, I only
change my garrison.”

Raoul was silent and bowed. Louis still listened after he had done
speaking.

“_Mordioux!_” cried D’Artagnan, “that was well spoken! was it not, your
majesty? A good race! a noble race!”

“Yes,” murmured the king, without, however daring to manifest
his emotion, for it had no other cause than contact with a nature
intrinsically noble. “Yes, monsieur, you say truly:--wherever you were,
you were the king’s. But in changing your garrison, believe me you will
find an advancement of which you are worthy.”

Raoul saw that this ended what the king had to say to him. And with
the perfect tact which characterized his refined nature, he bowed and
retired.

“Is there anything else, monsieur, of which you have to inform me?” said
the king, when he found himself again alone with D’Artagnan.

“Yes, sire, and I kept that news for the last, for it is sad, and will
clothe European royalty in mourning.”

“What do you tell me?”

“Sire, in passing through Blois, a word, a sad word, echoed from the
palace, struck my ear.”

“In truth, you terrify me, M. d’Artagnan.”

“Sire, this word was pronounced to me by a _piqueur_, who wore crape on
his arm.”

“My uncle, Gaston of Orleans, perhaps.”

“Sire, he has rendered his last sigh.”

“And I was not warned of it!” cried the king, whose royal susceptibility
saw an insult in the absence of this intelligence.

“Oh! do not be angry, sire,” said D’Artagnan; “neither the couriers
of Paris, nor the couriers of the whole world, can travel with your
servant; the courier from Blois will not be here these two hours, and he
rides well, I assure you, seeing that I only passed him on the thither
side of Orleans.”

“My uncle Gaston,” murmured Louis, pressing his hand to his brow, and
comprising in those three words all that his memory recalled of that
symbol of opposing sentiments.

“Eh! yes, sire, it is thus,” said D’Artagnan, philosophically replying
to the royal thought, “it is thus the past flies away.”

“That is true, monsieur, that is true; but there remains for us, thank
God! the future; and we will try to make it not too dark.”

“I feel confidence in your majesty on that head,” said D’Artagnan,
bowing, “and now--”

“You are right, monsieur; I had forgotten the hundred leagues you have
just ridden. Go, monsieur, take care of one of the best of soldiers, and
when you have reposed a little, come and place yourself at my disposal.”

“Sire, absent or present, I am always yours.”

D’Artagnan bowed and retired. Then, as if he had only come from
Fontainebleau, he quickly traversed the Louvre to rejoin Bragelonne.



Chapter II. A Lover and His Mistress.

Whilst the wax-lights were burning in the castle of Blois, around the
inanimate body of Gaston of Orleans, that last representative of the
past; whilst the _bourgeois_ of the city were thinking out his epitaph,
which was far from being a panegyric; whilst madame the dowager, no
longer remembering that in her young days she had loved that senseless
corpse to such a degree as to fly the paternal palace for his sake,
was making, within twenty paces of the funeral apartment, her little
calculations of interest and her little sacrifices of pride; other
interests and other prides were in agitation in all the parts of the
castle into which a living soul could penetrate. Neither the lugubrious
sounds of the bells, nor the voices of the chanters, nor the splendor
of the wax-lights through the windows, nor the preparations for the
funeral, had power to divert the attention of two persons, placed at a
window of the interior court--a window that we are acquainted with,
and which lighted a chamber forming part of what were called the little
apartments. For the rest, a joyous beam of the sun, for the sun appeared
to care little for the loss France had just suffered; a sunbeam, we say,
descended upon them, drawing perfumes from the neighboring flowers, and
animating the walls themselves. These two persons, so occupied, not by
the death of the duke, but by the conversation which was the consequence
of that death, were a young woman and a young man. The latter personage,
a man of from twenty-five to twenty-six years of age, with a mien
sometimes lively and sometimes dull, making good use of two large eyes,
shaded with long eye-lashes, was short of stature and swart of skin; he
smiled with an enormous, but well-furnished mouth, and his pointed chin,
which appeared to enjoy a mobility nature does not ordinarily grant to
that portion of the countenance, leant from time to time very lovingly
towards his interlocutrix, who, we must say, did not always draw back so
rapidly as strict propriety had a right to require. The young girl--we
know her, for we have already seen her, at that very same window, by the
light of that same sun--the young girl presented a singular mixture of
shyness and reflection; she was charming when she laughed, beautiful
when she became serious; but, let us hasten to say, she was more
frequently charming than beautiful. These two appeared to have attained
the culminating point of a discussion--half-bantering, half-serious.

“Now, Monsieur Malicorne,” said the young girl, “does it, at length,
please you that we should talk reasonably?”

“You believe that that is very easy, Mademoiselle Aure,” replied the
young man. “To do what we like, when we can only do what we are able--”

“Good! there he is bewildered in his phrases.”

“Who, I?”

“Yes, you; quit that lawyer’s logic, my dear.”

“Another impossibility. Clerk I am, Mademoiselle de Montalais.”

“Demoiselle I am, Monsieur Malicorne.”

“Alas, I know it well, and you overwhelm me by your rank; so I will say
no more to you.”

“Well, no, I don’t overwhelm you; say what you have to tell me--say it,
I insist upon it.”

“Well, I obey you.”

“That is truly fortunate.”

“Monsieur is dead.”

“Ah, _peste!_ that’s news! And where do you come from, to be able to
tell us that?”

“I come from Orleans, mademoiselle.”

“And is that all the news you bring?”

“Ah, no; I am come to tell you that Madame Henrietta of England is
coming to marry the king’s brother.”

“Indeed, Malicorne, you are insupportable with your news of the last
century. Now, mind, if you persist in this bad habit of laughing at
people, I will have you turned out.”

“Oh!”

“Yes, for really you exasperate me.”

“There, there. Patience, mademoiselle.”

“You want to make yourself of consequence; I know well enough why. Go!”

“Tell me, and I will answer you frankly, yes, if the thing be true.”

“You know that I am anxious to have that commission of lady of honor,
which I have been foolish enough to ask of you, and you do not use your
credit.”

“Who, I?” Malicorne cast down his eyes, joined his hands, and assumed
his sullen air. “And what credit can the poor clerk of a procurer have,
pray?”

“Your father has not twenty thousand livres a year for nothing, M.
Malicorne.”

“A provincial fortune, Mademoiselle de Montalais.”

“Your father is not in the secrets of monsieur le prince for nothing.”

“An advantage which is confined to lending monseigneur money.”

“In a word, you are not the most cunning young fellow in the province
for nothing.”

“You flatter me!”

“Who, I?”

“Yes, you.”

“How so?”

“Since I maintain that I have no credit, and you maintain I have.”

“Well, then,--my commission?”

“Well,--your commission?”

“Shall I have it, or shall I not?”

“You shall have it.”

“Ay, but when?”

“When you like.”

“Where is it, then?”

“In my pocket.”

“How--in your pocket?”

“Yes.”

And, with a smile, Malicorne drew from his pocket a letter, upon which
mademoiselle seized as a prey, and which she read eagerly. As she read,
her face brightened.

“Malicorne,” cried she after having read it, “In truth, you are a good
lad.”

“What for, mademoiselle?”

“Because you might have been paid for this commission, and you have
not.” And she burst into a loud laugh, thinking to put the clerk out of
countenance; but Malicorne sustained the attack bravely.

“I do not understand you,” said he. It was now Montalais who was
disconcerted in her turn. “I have declared my sentiments to you,”
 continued Malicorne. “You have told me three times, laughing all the
while, that you did not love me; you have embraced me once without
laughing, and that is all I want.”

“All?” said the proud and coquettish Montalais, in a tone through which
the wounded pride was visible.

“Absolutely all, mademoiselle,” replied Malicorne.

“Ah!”--And this monosyllable indicated as much anger as the young man
might have expected gratitude. He shook his head quietly.

“Listen, Montalais,” said he, without heeding whether that familiarity
pleased his mistress or not; “let us not dispute about it.”

“And why not?”

“Because during the year which I have known you, you might have had me
turned out of doors twenty times if I did not please you.”

“Indeed; and on what account should I have had you turned out?”

“Because I have been sufficiently impertinent for that.”

“Oh, that,--yes, that’s true.”

“You see plainly that you are forced to avow it,” said Malicorne.

“Monsieur Malicorne!”

“Don’t let us be angry; if you have retained me, then it has not been
without cause.”

“It is not, at least, because I love you,” cried Montalais.

“Granted. I will even say, at this moment, I am certain that you hate
me.”

“Oh, you have never spoken so truly.”

“Well, on my part, I detest you.”

“Ah! I take the act.”

“Take it. You find me brutal and foolish; on my part I find you have a
harsh voice, and your face is too often distorted with anger. At this
moment you would allow yourself to be thrown out of that window rather
than allow me to kiss the tip of your finger; I would precipitate myself
from the top of the balcony rather than touch the hem of your robe. But,
in five minutes, you will love me, and I shall adore you. Oh, it is just
so.”

“I doubt it.”

“And I swear it.”

“Coxcomb!”

“And then, that is not the true reason. You stand in need of me, Aure,
and I of you. When it pleases you to be gay, I make you laugh; when it
suits me to be loving, I look at you. I have given you a commission
of lady of honor which you wished for; you will give me, presently,
something I wish for.”

“I will?”

“Yes, you will; but, at this moment, my dear Aure, I declare to you that
I wish for absolutely nothing, so be at ease.”

“You are a frightful man, Malicorne; I was going to rejoice at getting
this commission, and thus you quench my joy.”

“Good; there is no time lost,--you will rejoice when I am gone.”

“Go, then; and after--”

“So be it; but in the first place, a piece of advice.”

“What is it?”

“Resume your good-humor,--you are ugly when you pout.”

“Coarse!”

“Come, let us tell the truth to each other, while we are about it.”

“Oh, Malicorne! Bad-hearted man!”

“Oh, Montalais! Ungrateful girl!”

The young man leant with his elbow upon the window-frame; Montalais
took a book and opened it. Malicorne stood up, brushed his hat with his
sleeve, smoothed down his black doublet;--Montalais, though pretending
to read, looked at him out of the corner of her eye.

“Good!” cried she, furious; “he has assumed his respectful air--and he
will pout for a week.”

“A fortnight, mademoiselle,” said Malicorne, bowing.

Montalais lifted up her little doubled fist. “Monster!” said she; “oh!
that I were a man!”

“What would you do to me?”

“I would strangle you.”

“Ah! very well, then,” said Malicorne; “I believe I begin to desire
something.”

“And what do you desire, Monsieur Demon? That I should lose my soul from
anger?”

Malicorne was rolling his hat respectfully between his fingers; but, all
at once, he let fall his hat, seized the young girl by the shoulders,
pulled her towards him, and sealed her mouth with two lips that were
very warm, for a man pretending to so much indifference. Aure would have
cried out, but the cry was stifled in his kiss. Nervous and, apparently,
angry, the young girl pushed Malicorne against the wall.

“Good!” said Malicorne, philosophically, “that’s enough for six weeks.
Adieu, mademoiselle, accept my very humble salutation.” And he made
three steps towards the door.

“Well! no,--you shall not go!” cried Montalais, stamping with her little
foot. “Stay where you are! I order you!”

“You order me?”

“Yes; am I not mistress?”

“Of my heart and soul, without doubt.”

“A pretty property! _ma foi!_ The soul is silly and the heart dry.”

“Beware, Montalais, I know you,” said Malicorne; “you are going to fall
in love with your humble servant.”

“Well, yes!” said she, hanging round his neck with childish indolence,
rather than with loving abandonment. “Well, yes! for I must thank you at
least.”

“And for what?”

“For the commission; is it not my whole future?”

“And mine.”

Montalais looked at him.

“It is frightful,” said she, “that one can never guess whether you are
speaking seriously or not.”

“I cannot speak more seriously. I was going to Paris,--you are going
there,--we are going there.”

“And so it was for that motive only you have served me; selfish fellow!”

“What would you have me say, Aure? I cannot live without you.”

“Well! in truth, it is just so with me; you are, nevertheless, it must
be confessed, a very bad-hearted young man.”

“Aure, my dear Aure, take care! if you take to calling me names again,
you know the effect they produce upon me, and I shall adore you.” And so
saying, Malicorne drew the young girl a second time towards him. But at
that instant a step resounded on the staircase. The young people were so
close, that they would have been surprised in the arms of each other, if
Montalais had not violently pushed Malicorne, with his back against
the door, just then opening. A loud cry, followed by angry reproaches,
immediately resounded. It was Madame de Saint-Remy who uttered the cry
and the angry words. The unlucky Malicorne almost crushed her between
the wall and the door she was coming in at.

“It is again that good-for-nothing!” cried the old lady. “Always here!”

“Ah, madame!” replied Malicorne, in a respectful tone; “it is eight long
days since I was here.”



Chapter III. In Which We at Length See the True Heroine of this History
Appear.

Behind Madame de Saint-Remy stood Mademoiselle de la Valliere. She heard
the explosion of maternal anger, and as she divined the cause of it,
she entered the chamber trembling, and perceived the unlucky Malicorne,
whose woeful countenance might have softened or set laughing whoever
observed it coolly. He had promptly intrenched himself behind a large
chair, as if to avoid the first attacks of Madame de Saint-Remy; he had
no hopes of prevailing with words, for she spoke louder than he, and
without stopping; but he reckoned upon the eloquence of his gestures.
The old lady would neither listen to nor see anything; Malicorne had
long been one of her antipathies. But her anger was too great not to
overflow from Malicorne on his accomplice. Montalais had her turn.

“And you, mademoiselle; you may be certain I shall inform madame of what
is going on in the apartment of one of her ladies of honor?”

“Oh, dear mother!” cried Mademoiselle de la Valliere, “for mercy’s sake,
spare--”

“Hold your tongue, mademoiselle, and do not uselessly trouble yourself
to intercede for unworthy people; that a young maid of honor like you
should be subjected to a bad example is, certes, a misfortune great
enough; but that you should sanction it by your indulgence is what I
will not allow.”

“But in truth,” said Montalais, rebelling again, “I do not know under
what pretense you treat me thus. I am doing no harm, I suppose?”

“And that great good-for-nothing, mademoiselle,” resumed Madame de
Saint-Remy, pointing to Malicorne, “is he here to do any good, I ask
you?”

“He is neither here for good nor harm, madame; he comes to see me, that
is all.”

“It is all very well! all very well!” said the old lady. “Her royal
highness shall be informed of it, and she will judge.”

“At all events, I do not see why,” replied Montalais, “it should be
forbidden M. Malicorne to have intentions towards me, if his intentions
are honorable.”

“Honorable intentions with such a face!” cried Madame de Saint-Remy.

“I thank you in the name of my face, madame,” said Malicorne.

“Come, my daughter, come,” continued Madame de Saint-Remy; “we will
go and inform madame that at the very moment she is weeping for her
husband, at the moment when we are all weeping for a master in this
old castle of Blois, the abode of grief, there are people who amuse
themselves with flirtations!”

“Oh!” cried both the accused, with one voice.

“A maid of honor! a maid of honor!” cried the old lady, lifting her
hands towards heaven.

“Well! it is there you are mistaken, madame,” said Montalais, highly
exasperated; “I am no longer a maid of honor, of madame’s at least.”

“Have you given in your resignation, mademoiselle? That is well! I
cannot but applaud such a determination, and I do applaud it.”

“I do not give in my resignation, madame; I take another service,--that
is all.”

“In the _bourgeoisie_ or in the _robe?_” asked Madame de Saint-Remy,
disdainfully.

“Please to learn, madame, that I am not a girl to serve either
_bourgeoises_ or _robines_; and that instead of the miserable court at
which you vegetate, I am going to reside in a court almost royal.”

“Ha, ha! a royal court,” said Madame de Saint-Remy, forcing a laugh; “a
royal court! What do you think of that, my daughter?”

And she turned towards Mademoiselle de la Valliere, whom she would by
main force have dragged away from Montalais, and who instead of obeying
the impulse of Madame de Saint-Remy, looked first at her mother and then
at Montalais with her beautiful conciliatory eyes.

“I did not say a royal court, madame,” replied Montalais; “because
Madame Henrietta of England, who is about to become the wife of S. A.
R. Monsieur, is not a queen. I said almost royal, and I spoke correctly,
since she will be sister-in-law to the king.”

A thunderbolt falling upon the castle of Blois would not have astonished
Madame de Saint-Remy more than the last sentence of Montalais.

“What do you say? of Son Altesse Royale Madame Henrietta?” stammered out
the old lady.

“I say I am going to belong to her household, as maid of honor; that is
what I say.”

“As maid of honor!” cried, at the same time, Madame de Saint-Remy with
despair, and Mademoiselle de la Valliere with delight.

“Yes, madame, as maid of honor.”

The old lady’s head sank down as if the blow had been too severe for
her. But, almost immediately recovering herself, she launched a last
projectile at her adversary.

“Oh! oh!” said she; “I have heard of many of these sorts of promises
beforehand, which often lead people to flatter themselves with wild
hopes, and at the last moment, when the time comes to keep the promises,
and have the hopes realized, they are surprised to see the great credit
upon which they reckoned vanish like smoke.”

“Oh! madame, the credit of my protector is incontestable and his
promises are as good as deeds.”

“And would it be indiscreet to ask you the name of this powerful
protector?”

“Oh! _mon Dieu!_ no! it is that gentleman there,” said Montalais,
pointing to Malicorne, who, during this scene, had preserved the most
imperturbable coolness, and the most comic dignity.

“Monsieur!” cried Madame de Saint-Remy, with an explosion of hilarity,
“monsieur is your protector! Is the man whose credit is so powerful, and
whose promises are as good as deeds, Monsieur Malicorne!”

Malicorne bowed.

As to Montalais, as her sole reply, she drew the brevet from her pocket,
and showed it to the old lady.

“Here is the _brevet_,” said she.

At once all was over. As soon as she had cast a rapid glance over this
fortunate _brevet_, the good lady clasped her hands, an unspeakable
expression of envy and despair contracted her countenance, and she
was obliged to sit down to avoid fainting. Montalais was not malicious
enough to rejoice extravagantly at her victory, or to overwhelm the
conquered enemy, particularly when that enemy was the mother of her
friend; she used then, but did not abuse her triumph. Malicorne was
less generous; he assumed noble _poses_ in his _fauteuil_ and stretched
himself out with a familiarity which, two hours earlier, would have
drawn upon him threats of a caning.

“Maid of honor to the young madame!” repeated Madame de Saint-Remy,
still but half convinced.

“Yes, madame, and through the protection of M. Malicorne, moreover.”

“It is incredible!” repeated the old lady: “is it not incredible,
Louise?” But Louise did not reply; she was sitting, thoughtfully, almost
sad; passing one had over her beautiful brow, she sighed heavily.

“Well, but, monsieur,” said Madame de Saint-Remy, all at once, “how did
you manage to obtain this post?”

“I asked for it, madame.”

“Of whom?”

“One of my friends.”

“And you have friends sufficiently powerful at court to give you such
proofs of their credit?”

“It appears so.”

“And may one ask the name of these friends?”

“I did not say I had many friends, madame, I said I had one friend.”

“And that friend is called?”

“_Peste!_ madame, you go too far! When one has a friend as powerful as
mine, we do not publish his name in that fashion, in open day, in order
that he may be stolen from us.”

“You are right, monsieur, to be silent as to that name; for I think it
would be pretty difficult for you to tell it.”

“At all events,” said Montalais, “if the friend does not exist, the
_brevet_ does, and that cuts short the question.”

“Then, I conceive,” said Madame de Saint-Remy, with the gracious smile
of the cat who is going to scratch, “when I found monsieur here just
now--”

“Well?”

“He brought you the _brevet_.”

“Exactly, madame; you have guessed rightly.”

“Well, then, nothing can be more moral or proper.”

“I think so, madame.”

“And I have been wrong, as it appears, in reproaching you,
mademoiselle.”

“Very wrong, madame; but I am so accustomed to your reproaches, that I
pardon you these.”

“In that case, let us begone, Louise; we have nothing to do but retire.
Well!”

“Madame!” said La Valliere starting, “did you speak?”

“You do not appear to be listening, my child.”

“No, madame, I was thinking.”

“About what?”

“A thousand things.”

“You bear me no ill-will, at least, Louise?” cried Montalais, pressing
her hand.

“And why should I, my dear Aure?” replied the girl in a voice soft as a
flute.

“_Dame!_” resumed Madame de Saint-Remy; “if she did bear you a little
ill-will, poor girl, she could not be much blamed.”

“And why should she bear me ill-will, good gracious?”

“It appears to me that she is of as good a family, and as pretty as
you.”

“Mother! mother!” cried Louise.

“Prettier a hundred times, madame--not of a better family; but that does
not tell me why Louise should bear me ill-will.”

“Do you think it will be very amusing for her to be buried alive at
Blois, when you are going to shine at Paris?”

“But, madame, it is not I who prevent Louise following me thither; on
the contrary, I should certainly be most happy if she came there.”

“But it appears that M. Malicorne, who is all-powerful at court--”

“Ah! so much the worse, madame,” said Malicorne, “every one for himself
in this poor world.”

“Malicorne! Malicorne!” said Montalais. Then stooping towards the young
man:--

“Occupy Madame de Saint-Remy, either in disputing with her, or making
it up with her; I must speak to Louise.” And, at the same time, a soft
pressure of the hand recompensed Malicorne for his future obedience.
Malicorne went grumbling towards Madame de Saint-Remy, whilst Montalais
said to her friend, throwing one arm around her neck:--

“What is the matter? Tell _me_. Is it true that you would not love me if
I were to shine, as your mother says?”

“Oh, no!” said the young girl, with difficulty restraining her tears;
“on the contrary, I rejoice at your good fortune.”

“Rejoice! why, one would say you are ready to cry!”

“Do people never weep except from envy?”

“Oh! yes, I understand; I am going to Paris and that word Paris recalls
to your mind a certain cavalier--”

“Aure!”

“A certain cavalier who formerly lived near Blois, and who now resides
at Paris.”

“In truth, I know not what ails me, but I feel stifled.”

“Weep, then, weep, as you cannot give me a smile!”

Louise raised her sweet face, which the tears, rolling down one after
the other, illumined like diamonds.

“Come, confess,” said Montalais.

“What shall I confess?”

“What makes you weep; people don’t weep without cause. I am your friend;
whatever you would wish me to do, I will do. Malicorne is more powerful
than you would think. Do you wish to go to Paris?”

“Alas!” sighed Louise.

“Do you wish to come to Paris?”

“To remain here alone, in this old castle, I who have enjoyed the
delightful habit of listening to your songs, of pressing your hand,
of running about the park with you. Oh! how I shall be _ennuyee!_ how
quickly I shall die!”

“Do you wish to come to Paris?”

Louise breathed another sigh.

“You do not answer me.”

“What would you that I should reply?”

“Yes or no; that is not very difficult, I think.”

“Oh! you are very fortunate, Montalais!”

“That is to say you would like to be in my place.”

Louise was silent.

“Little obstinate thing!” said Montalais; “did ever any one keep her
secrets from her friend thus? But, confess that you would like to come
to Paris; confess that you are dying with the wish to see Raoul again.”

“I cannot confess that.”

“Then you are wrong.”

“In what way?”

“Because--do you not see this _brevet?_”

“To be sure I do.”

“Well, I would have got you a similar one.”

“By whose means?”

“Malicorne’s.”

“Aure, are you telling the truth? Is that possible?”

“Malicorne is there; and what he has done for me, he surely can do for
you.”

Malicorne had heard his name pronounced twice; he was delighted
at having an opportunity of coming to a conclusion with Madame de
Saint-Remy, and he turned round:--

“What is the question, mademoiselle?”

“Come hither, Malicorne,” said Montalais, with an imperious gesture.
Malicorne obeyed.

“A _brevet_ like this,” said Montalais.

“How so?”

“A _brevet_ like this; that is plain enough.”

“But--”

“I want one--I must have one!”

“Oh! oh! you must have one!”

“Yes.”

“It is impossible, is it not, M. Malicorne?” said Louise, with her
sweet, soft voice.

“If it is for _you_, mademoiselle--”

“For me. Yes, Monsieur Malicorne, it _would_ be for me.”

“And if Mademoiselle de Montalais asks it at the same time--”

“Mademoiselle de Montalais does not ask it, she requires it.”

“Well! we will endeavor to obey you, mademoiselle.”

“And you will have her named?”

“We will try.”

“No evasive answers, Louise de la Valliere shall be maid of honor to
Madame Henrietta within a week.”

“How you talk!”

“Within a week, or else--”

“Well! or else?”

“You may take back your _brevet_, Monsieur Malicorne; I will not leave
my friend.”

“Dear Montalais!”

“That is right. Keep your _brevet_; Mademoiselle de la Valliere shall be
a maid of honor.”

“Is that true?”

“Quite true.”

“I may then hope to go to Paris?”

“Depend on it.”

“Oh! Monsieur Malicorne, what joy!” cried Louise, clapping her hands,
and bounding with pleasure.

“Little dissembler!” said Montalais, “try again to make me believe you
are not in love with Raoul.”

Louise blushed like a rose in June, but instead of replying, she ran and
embraced her mother. “Madame,” said she, “do you know that M. Malicorne
is going to have me appointed maid of honor?”

“M. Malicorne is a prince in disguise,” replied the old lady, “he is
all-powerful, seemingly.”

“Should you also like to be a maid of honor?” asked Malicorne of Madame
de Saint-Remy. “Whilst I am about it, I might as well get everybody
appointed.”

And upon that he went away, leaving the poor lady quite disconcerted.

“Humph!” murmured Malicorne as he descended the stairs,--“Humph! there
goes another note of a thousand livres! but I must get through as well
as I can; my friend Manicamp does nothing for nothing.”



Chapter IV. Malicorne and Manicamp.

The introduction of these two new personages into this history and that
mysterious affinity of names and sentiments, merit some attention on the
part of both historian and reader. We will then enter into some details
concerning Messieurs Malicorne and Manicamp. Malicorne, we know, had
made the journey to Orleans in search of the _brevet_ destined for
Mademoiselle de Montalais, the arrival of which had produced such a
strong feeling at the castle of Blois. At that moment, M. de Manicamp
was at Orleans. A singular person was this M. de Manicamp; a very
intelligent young fellow, always poor, always needy, although he dipped
his hand freely into the purse of M. le Comte de Guiche, one of the best
furnished purses of the period. M. le Comte de Guiche had had, as
the companion of his boyhood, this De Manicamp, a poor gentleman,
vassal-born, of the house of Gramont. M. de Manicamp, with his tact
and talent had created himself a revenue in the opulent family of the
celebrated marechal. From his infancy he had, with calculation beyond
his age, lent his mane and complaisance to the follies of the Comte de
Guiche. If his noble companion had stolen some fruit destined for
Madame la Marechale, if he had broken a mirror, or put out a dog’s eye,
Manicamp declared himself guilty of the crime committed, and received
the punishment, which was not made the milder for falling on the
innocent. But this was the way this system of abnegation was paid
for: instead of wearing such mean habiliments as his paternal fortunes
entitled him to, he was able to appear brilliant, superb, like a young
noble of fifty thousand livres a year. It was not that he was mean in
character or humble in spirit; no, he was a philosopher, or rather he
had the indifference, the apathy, the obstinacy which banish from man
every sentiment of the supernatural. His sole ambition was to spend
money. But, in this respect, the worthy M. de Manicamp was a gulf. Three
or four times every year he drained the Comte de Guiche, and when the
Comte de Guiche was thoroughly drained, when he had turned out his
pockets and his purse before him, when he declared that it would be at
least a fortnight before paternal munificence would refill those pockets
and that purse, Manicamp lost all his energy, he went to bed, remained
there, ate nothing and sold his handsome clothes, under the pretense
that, remaining in bed, he did not want them. During this prostration
of mind and strength, the purse of the Comte de Guiche was getting full
again, and when once filled, overflowed into that of De Manicamp, who
bought new clothes, dressed himself again, and recommenced the same
life he had followed before. The mania of selling his new clothes for
a quarter of what they were worth, had rendered our hero sufficiently
celebrated in Orleans, a city where, in general, we should be puzzled
to say why he came to pass his days of penitence. Provincial _debauches,
petits-maitres_ of six hundred livres a year, shared the fragments of
his opulence.

Among the admirers of these splendid toilettes, our friend Malicorne
was conspicuous; he was the son of a syndic of the city, of whom M.
de Conde, always needy as a De Conde, often borrowed money at enormous
interest. M. Malicorne kept the paternal money-chest; that is to
say, that in those times of easy morals, he had made for himself, by
following the example of his father, and lending at high interest for
short terms, a revenue of eighteen hundred livres, without reckoning
six hundred livres furnished by the generosity of the syndic; so that
Malicorne was the king of the gay youth of Orleans, having two thousand
four hundred livres to scatter, squander, and waste on follies of every
kind. But, quite contrary to Manicamp, Malicorne was terribly ambitious.
He loved from ambition; he spent money out of ambition; and he would
have ruined himself for ambition. Malicorne had determined to rise, at
whatever price it might cost, and for this, whatever price it did cost,
he had given himself a mistress and a friend. The mistress, Mademoiselle
de Montalais, was cruel, as regarded love; but she was of a noble
family, and that was sufficient for Malicorne. The friend had little or
no friendship, but he was the favorite of the Comte de Guiche, himself
the friend of Monsieur, the king’s brother; and that was sufficient for
Malicorne. Only, in the chapter of charges, Mademoiselle de Montalais
cost _per annum_:--ribbons, gloves, and sweets, a thousand livres.
De Manicamp cost--money lent, never returned--from twelve to fifteen
hundred livres _per annum_. So that there was nothing left for
Malicorne. Ah! yes, we are mistaken; there was left the paternal strong
box. He employed a mode of proceeding, upon which he preserved the most
profound secrecy, and which consisted in advancing to himself, from
the coffers of the syndic, half a dozen year’s profits, that is to
say, fifteen thousand livres, swearing to himself--observe, quite to
himself--to repay this deficiency as soon as an opportunity should
present itself. The opportunity was expected to be the concession of
a good post in the household of Monsieur, when that household would be
established at the period of his marriage. This juncture had arrived,
and the household was about to be established. A good post in the family
of a prince of the blood, when it is given by the credit, and on the
recommendation of a friend, like the Comte de Guiche, is worth at least
twelve thousand livres _per annum_; and by the means which M. Malicorne
had taken to make his revenues fructify, twelve thousand livres might
rise to twenty thousand. Then, when once an incumbent of this post, he
would marry Mademoiselle de Montalais. Mademoiselle de Montalais, of
a half noble family, not only would be dowered, but would ennoble
Malicorne. But, in order that Mademoiselle de Montalais, who had not a
large patrimonial fortune, although an only daughter, should be suitably
dowered, it was necessary that she should belong to some great princess,
as prodigal as the dowager Madame was covetous. And in order that the
wife should not be of one party whilst the husband belonged to the
other, a situation which presents serious inconveniences, particularly
with characters like those of the future consorts--Malicorne had
imagined the idea of making the central point of union the household of
Monsieur, the king’s brother. Mademoiselle de Montalais would be maid of
honor to Madame. M. Malicorne would be officer to Monsieur.

It is plain the plan was formed by a clear head; it is plain, also,
that it had been bravely executed. Malicorne had asked Manicamp to ask
a _brevet_ of maid of honor of the Comte de Guiche; and the Comte de
Guiche had asked this _brevet_ of Monsieur, who had signed it without
hesitation. The constructive plan of Malicorne--for we may well suppose
that the combinations of a mind as active as his were not confined
to the present, but extended to the future--the constructive plan of
Malicorne, we say, was this:--To obtain entrance into the household of
Madame Henrietta for a woman devoted to himself, who was intelligent,
young, handsome, and intriguing; to learn, by means of this woman, all
the feminine secrets of the young household; whilst he, Malicorne, and
his friend Manicamp, should, between them, know all the male secrets
of the young community. It was by these means that a rapid and splendid
fortune might be acquired at one and the same time. Malicorne was a
vile name; he who bore it had too much wit to conceal this truth from
himself; but an estate might be purchased; and Malicorne of some place,
or even De Malicorne itself, for short, would ring more nobly on the
ear.

It was not improbable that a most aristocratic origin might be hunted up
by the heralds for this name of Malicorne; might it not come from some
estate where a bull with mortal horns had caused some great misfortune,
and baptized the soil with the blood it had spilt? Certes, this plan
presented itself bristling with difficulties: but the greatest of all
was Mademoiselle de Montalais herself. Capricious, variable, close,
giddy, free, prudish, a virgin armed with claws, Erigone stained with
grapes, she sometimes overturned, with a single dash of her white
fingers, or with a single puff from her laughing lips, the edifice which
had exhausted Malicorne’s patience for a month.

Love apart, Malicorne was happy; but this love, which he could not help
feeling, he had the strength to conceal with care; persuaded that at the
least relaxing of the ties by which he had bound his Protean female,
the demon would overthrow and laugh at him. He humbled his mistress by
disdaining her. Burning with desire, when she advanced to tempt him,
he had the art to appear ice, persuaded that if he opened his arms, she
would run away laughing at him. On her side, Montalais believed she
did not love Malicorne; whilst, on the contrary, in reality she did.
Malicorne repeated to her so often his protestation of indifference,
that she finished, sometimes, by believing him; and then she believed
she detested Malicorne. If she tried to bring him back by coquetry,
Malicorne played the coquette better than she could. But what made
Montalais hold to Malicorne in an indissoluble fashion, was that
Malicorne always came cram full of fresh news from the court and the
city; Malicorne always brought to Blois a fashion, a secret, or a
perfume; that Malicorne never asked for a meeting, but, on the contrary,
required to be supplicated to receive the favors he burned to obtain. On
her side, Montalais was no miser with stories. By her means, Malicorne
learnt all that passed at Blois, in the family of the dowager Madame;
and he related to Manicamp tales that made him ready to die with
laughing, which the latter, out of idleness, took ready-made to M. de
Guiche, who carried them to Monsieur.

Such, in two words, was the woof of petty interests and petty
conspiracies which united Blois with Orleans, and Orleans with Pairs;
and which was about to bring into the last named city where she was to
produce so great a revolution, the poor little La Valliere, who was far
from suspecting, as she returned joyfully, leaning on the arm of her
mother, for what a strange future she was reserved. As to the good
man, Malicorne--we speak of the syndic of Orleans--he did not see more
clearly into the present than others did into the future; and had no
suspicion as he walked, every day, between three and five o’clock, after
his dinner, upon the Place Sainte-Catherine, in his gray coat, cut
after the fashion of Louis XIII. and his cloth shoes with great knots of
ribbon, that it was he who was paying for all those bursts of laughter,
all those stolen kisses, all those whisperings, all those little
keepsakes, and all those bubble projects which formed a chain of
forty-five leagues in length, from the palais of Blois to the Palais
Royal.



Chapter V: Manicamp and Malicorne.

Malicorne, then, left Blois, as we have said, and went to find his
friend, Manicamp, then in temporary retreat in the city of Orleans. It
was just at the moment when that young nobleman was employed in selling
the last decent clothing he had left. He had, a fortnight before,
extorted from the Comte de Guiche a hundred pistoles, all he had, to
assist in equipping him properly to go and meet Madame, on her arrival
at Le Havre. He had drawn from Malicorne, three days before, fifty
pistoles, the price of the _brevet_ obtained for Montalais. He had then
no expectation of anything else, having exhausted all his resources,
with the exception of selling a handsome suit of cloth and satin,
embroidered and laced with gold, which had been the admiration of the
court. But to be able to sell this suit, the last he had left,--as we
have been forced to confess to the reader--Manicamp had been obliged
to take to his bed. No more fire, no more pocket-money, no more
walking-money, nothing but sleep to take the place of repasts, companies
and balls. It has been said--“He who sleeps, dines;” but it has never
been affirmed--He who sleeps, plays--or, He who sleeps, dances.
Manicamp, reduced to this extremity of neither playing nor dancing, for
a week at least, was, consequently, very sad; he was expecting a usurer,
and saw Malicorne enter. A cry of distress escaped him.

“Eh! what!” said he, in a tone which nothing can describe, “is that you
again, dear friend?”

“Humph! you are very polite!” said Malicorne.

“Ay, but look you, I was expecting money, and, instead of money, I see
_you_.”

“And suppose I brought you some money?”

“Oh! that would be quite another thing. You are very welcome, my dear
friend!”

And he held out his hand, not for the hand of Malicorne, but for the
purse. Malicorne pretended to be mistaken, and gave him his hand.

“And the money?” said Manicamp.

“My dear friend, if you wish to have it, earn it.”

“What must be done for it?”

“Earn it, _parbleu!_”

“And after what fashion?”

“Oh! that is rather trying, I warn you.”

“The devil!”

“You must get out of bed, and go immediately to M. le Comte de Guiche.”

“I get up!” said Manicamp, stretching himself in his bed, complacently,
“oh, no, thank you!”

“You have sold all your clothes?”

“No, I have one suit left, the handsomest even, but I expect a
purchaser.”

“And the _chausses?_”

“Well, if you look, you will see them on that chair.”

“Very well! since you have some _chausses_ and a _pourpoint_ left, put
your legs into the first and your back into the other; have a horse
saddled, and set off.”

“Not I.”

“And why not?”

“_Morbleu!_ don’t you know, then, that M. de Guiche is at Etampes?”

“No, I thought he was at Paris. You will then only have fifteen leagues
to go, instead of thirty.”

“You are a wonderfully clever fellow! If I were to ride fifteen leagues
in these clothes, they would never be fit to put on again; and, instead
of selling them for thirty pistoles, I should be obliged to take
fifteen.”

“Sell them for whatever you like, but I must have a second commission of
maid of honor.”

“Good! for whom? Is Montalais doubled, then?”

“Vile fellow!--It is you who are doubled. You swallow up two
fortunes--mine, and that of M. le Comte de Guiche.”

“You should say, that of M. le Comte de Guiche and yours.”

“That is true; honor where it is due; but I return to my _brevet_.”

“And you are wrong.”

“Prove me that.”

“My friend, there will only be twelve maids of honor for madame; I have
already obtained for you what twelve hundred women are trying for, and
for that I was forced to employ all my diplomacy.”

“Oh! yes, I know you have been quite heroic, my dear friend.”

“We know what we are about,” said Manicamp.

“To whom do you tell that? When I am king, I promise you one thing.”

“What? To call yourself Malicorne the First?”

“No; to make you superintendent of my finances; but that is not the
question now.”

“Unfortunately.”

“The present affair is to procure for me a second place of maid of
honor.”

“My friend, if you were to promise me the price of heaven, I would
decline to disturb myself at this moment.”

Malicorne chinked the money in his pocket.

“There are twenty pistoles here,” said Malicorne.

“And what would you do with twenty pistoles, _mon Dieu!_”

“Well!” said Malicorne, a little angry, “suppose I were to add them to
the five hundred you already owe me?”

“You are right,” replied Manicamp, stretching out his hand again, “and
from that point of view I can accept them. Give them to me.”

“An instant, what the devil! it is not only holding out your hand that
will do; if I give you the twenty pistoles, shall I have my _brevet?_”

“To be sure you shall.”

“Soon?”

“To-day.”

“Oh! take care! Monsieur de Manicamp; you undertake much, and I do not
ask that. Thirty leagues in a day is too much, you would kill yourself.”

“I think nothing impossible when obliging a friend.”

“You are quite heroic.”

“Where are the twenty pistoles?”

“Here they are,” said Malicorne, showing them.

“That’s well.”

“Yes, but my dear M. Manicamp, you would consume them in post-horses
alone!”

“No, no, make yourself easy on that score.”

“Pardon me. Why, it is fifteen leagues from this place to Etampes?”

“Fourteen.”

“Well! fourteen be it; fourteen leagues makes seven posts; at twenty
_sous_ the post, seven _livres_; seven _livres_ the courier, fourteen;
as many for coming back, twenty-eight! as much for bed and supper, that
makes sixty _livres_ this complaisance would cost.”

Manicamp stretched himself like a serpent in his bed, and fixing his two
great eyes upon Malicorne, “You are right,” said he; “I could not return
before to-morrow;” and he took the twenty pistoles.

“Now, then, be off!”

“Well, as I cannot be back before to-morrow, we have time.”

“Time for what?”

“Time to play.”

“What do you wish to play with?”

“Your twenty pistoles, _pardieu!_”

“No; you always win.”

“I will wager them, then.”

“Against what?”

“Against twenty others.”

“And what shall be the object of the wager?”

“This. We have said it was fourteen leagues to Etampes.”

“Yes.”

“And fourteen leagues back?”

“Doubtless.”

“Well; for these twenty-eight leagues you cannot allow less than
fourteen hours?”

“That is agreed.”

“One hour to find the Comte de Guiche.”

“Go on.”

“And an hour to persuade him to write a letter to Monsieur.”

“Just so.”

“Sixteen hours in all?”

“You reckon as well as M. Colbert.”

“It is now twelve o’clock.”

“Half-past.”

“_Hein!_--you have a handsome watch!”

“What were you saying?” said Malicorne, putting his watch quickly back
into his fob.

“Ah! true; I was offering to lay you twenty pistoles against these you
have lent me, that you will have the Comte de Guiche’s letter in--”

“How soon?”

“In eight hours.”

“Have you a winged horse, then?”

“That is no matter. Will you bet?”

“I shall have the comte’s letter in eight hours?”

“Yes.”

“In hand?”

“In hand.”

“Well, be it so; I lay,” said Malicorne, curious enough to know how this
seller of clothes would get through.

“Is it agreed?”

“It is.”

“Pass me the pen, ink, and paper.”

“Here they are.”

“Thank you.”

Manicamp raised himself with a sigh, and leaning on his left elbow, in
his best hand, traced the following lines:--

“Good for an order for a place of maid of honor to Madame, which M. le
Comte de Guiche will take upon him to obtain at sight. DE MANICAMP.”

This painful task accomplished, he laid himself down in bed again.

“Well!” asked Malicorne, “what does this mean?”

“That means that if you are in a hurry to have the letter from the Comte
de Guiche for Monsieur, I have won my wager.”

“How the devil is that?”

“That is transparent enough, I think; you take that paper.”

“Well?”

“And you set out instead of me.”

“Ah!”

“You put your horses to their best speed.”

“Good!”

“In six hours you will be at Etampes; in seven hours you have the letter
from the comte, and I shall have won my wager without stirring from my
bed, which suits me and you too, at the same time, I am very sure.”

“Decidedly, Manicamp, you are a great man.”

“_Hein!_ I know that.”

“I am to start then for Etampes?”

“Directly.”

“I am to go to the Comte de Guiche with this order?”

“He will give you a similar one for Monsieur.”

“Monsieur will approve?”

“Instantly.”

“And I shall have my _brevet?_”

“You will.”

“Ah!”

“Well, I hope I behave genteely?”

“Adorably.”

“Thank you.”

“You do as you please, then, with the Comte de Guiche, Manicamp?”

“Except making money of him--everything?”

“_Diable!_ the exception is annoying; but then, if instead of asking him
for money, you were to ask--”

“What?”

“Something important.”

“What do you call important?”

“Well! suppose one of your friends asked you to render him a service?”

“I would not render it to him.”

“Selfish fellow!”

“Or at least I would ask him what service he would render me in
exchange.”

“Ah! that, perhaps, is fair. Well, that friend speaks to you.”

“What, you, Malicorne?”

“Yes; I.”

“Ah! ah! you are rich, then?”

“I have still fifty pistoles left.”

“Exactly the sum I want. Where are those fifty pistoles?”

“Here,” said Malicorne, slapping his pocket.

“Then speak, my friend; what do you want?”

Malicorne took up the pen, ink, and paper again, and presented them all
to Manicamp. “Write!” said he.

“Dictate!”

“An order for a place in the household of Monsieur.”

“Oh!” said Manicamp, laying down the pen, “a place in the household of
Monsieur for fifty pistoles?”

“You mistook me, my friend; you did not hear plainly.”

“What did you say, then?”

“I said five hundred.”

“And the five hundred?”

“Here they are.”

Manicamp devoured the rouleau with his eyes; but this time Malicorne
held it at a distance.

“Eh! what do you say to that? Five hundred pistoles.”

“I say it is for nothing, my friend,” said Manicamp, taking up the pen
again, “and you exhaust my credit. Dictate.”

Malicorne continued:

“Which my friend the Comte de Guiche will obtain for my friend
Malicorne.”

“That’s it,” said Manicamp.

“Pardon me, you have forgotten to sign.”

“Ah! that is true. The five hundred pistoles?”

“Here are two hundred and fifty of them.”

“And the other two hundred and fifty?”

“When I am in possession of my place.”

Manicamp made a face.

“In that case give me the recommendation back again.”

“What to do?”

“To add two words to it.”

“Two words?”

“Yes; two words only.”

“What are they?”

“In haste.”

Malicorne returned the recommendation; Manicamp added the words.

“Good,” said Malicorne, taking back the paper.

Manicamp began to count out the pistoles.

“There want twenty,” said he.

“How so?”

“The twenty I have won.”

“In what way?”

“By laying that you would have the letter from the Comte de Guiche in
eight hours.”

“Ah! that’s fair,” and he gave him the twenty pistoles.

Manicamp began to scoop up his gold by handfuls, and pour it in cascades
upon his bed.

“This second place,” murmured Malicorne, whilst drying his paper,
“which, at first glance appears to cost me more than the first, but--”
 He stopped, took up the pen in his turn, and wrote to Montalais:--

“MADEMOISELLE,--Announce to your friend that her commission will not be
long before it arrives; I am setting out to get it signed: that will be
twenty-eight leagues I shall have gone for the love of you.”

Then with his sardonic smile, taking up the interrupted sentence:--“This
place,” said he, “at first glance, appears to have cost more than the
first; but--the benefit will be, I hope, in proportion with the
expense, and Mademoiselle de la Valliere will bring me back more than
Mademoiselle de Montalais, or else,--or else my name is not Malicorne.
Farewell, Manicamp,” and he left the room.



Chapter VI. The Courtyard of the Hotel Grammont.

On Malicorne’s arrival at Orleans, he was informed that the Comte de
Guiche had just set out for Paris. Malicorne rested himself for a couple
of hours, and then prepared to continue his journey. He reached Paris
during the night, and alighted at a small hotel, where, in his previous
journeys to the capital, he had been accustomed to put up, and at
eight o’clock the next morning presented himself at the Hotel Grammont.
Malicorne arrived just in time, for the Comte de Guiche was on the point
of taking leave of Monsieur before setting out for Le Havre, where the
principal members of the French nobility had gone to await Madame’s
arrival from England. Malicorne pronounced the name of Manicamp, and was
immediately admitted. He found the Comte de Guiche in the courtyard
of the Hotel Grammont, inspecting his horses, which his trainers and
equerries were passing in review before him. The count, in the presence
of his tradespeople and of his servants, was engaged in praising or
blaming, as the case seemed to deserve, the appointments, horses, and
harness that were being submitted to him; when, in the midst of this
important occupation, the name of Manicamp was announced.

“Manicamp!” he exclaimed; “let him enter by all means.” And he advanced
a few steps toward the door.

Malicorne slipped through the half-open door, and looking at the Comte
de Guiche, who was surprised to see a face he did not recognize, instead
of the one he expected, said: “Forgive me, monsieur le comte, but I
believe a mistake has been made. M. Manicamp himself was announced to
you, instead of which it is only an envoy from him.”

“Ah!” exclaimed De Guiche, coldly; “and what do you bring me?”

“A letter, monsieur le comte.” Malicorne handed him the first document,
and narrowly watched the count’s face, who, as he read it, began to
laugh.

“What!” he exclaimed, “another maid of honor? Are all the maids of honor
in France, then, under his protection?”

Malicorne bowed.

“Why does he not come himself?” he inquired.

“He is confined to his bed.”

“The deuce! he has no money then, I suppose,” said De Guiche, shrugging
his shoulders. “What does he do with his money?”

Malicorne made a movement, to indicate that upon this subject he was as
ignorant as the count himself. “Why does he not make use of his credit,
then?” continued De Guiche.

“With regard to that, I think--”

“What?”

“That Manicamp has credit with no one but yourself, monsieur le comte!”

“He will not be at Le Havre, then?” Whereupon Malicorne made another
movement.

“But every one will be there.”

“I trust, monsieur le comte, that he will not neglect so excellent an
opportunity.”

“He should be at Paris by this time.”

“He will take the direct road perhaps to make up for lost time.”

“Where is he now?”

“At Orleans.”

“Monsieur,” said De Guiche, “you seem to me a man of very good taste.”

Malicorne was wearing some of Manicamp’s old-new clothes. He bowed in
return, saying, “You do me a very great honor, monsieur le comte.”

“Whom have I the pleasure of addressing?”

“My name is Malicorne, monsieur.”

“M. de Malicorne, what do you think of these pistol-holsters?”

Malicorne was a man of great readiness and immediately understood the
position of affairs. Besides, the “de” which had been prefixed to his
name, raised him to the rank of the person with whom he was conversing.
He looked at the holsters with the air of a connoisseur and said,
without hesitation: “Somewhat heavy, monsieur.”

“You see,” said De Guiche to the saddler, “this gentleman, who
understands these matters well, thinks the holsters heavy, a complaint I
had already made.” The saddler was full of excuses.

“What do you think,” asked De Guiche, “of this horse, which I have just
purchased?”

“To look at it, it seems perfect, monsieur le comte; but I must mount it
before I give you my opinion.”

“Do so, M. de Malicorne, and ride him round the court two or three
times.”

The courtyard of the hotel was so arranged, that whenever there was any
occasion for it, it could be used as a riding-school. Malicorne, with
perfect ease, arranged the bridle and snaffle-reins, placed his left
hand on the horse’s mane, and, with his foot in the stirrup, raised
himself and seated himself in the saddle. At first, he made the horse
walk the whole circuit of the court-yard at a foot-pace; next at a trot;
lastly at a gallop. He then drew up close to the count, dismounted, and
threw the bridle to a groom standing by. “Well,” said the count, “what
do you think of it, M. de Malicorne?”

“This horse, monsieur le comte, is of the Mecklenburg breed. In looking
whether the bit suited his mouth, I saw that he was rising seven, the
very age when the training of a horse intended for a charger should
commence. The forehand is light. A horse which holds its head high, it
is said, never tires his rider’s hand. The withers are rather low. The
drooping of the hind-quarters would almost make me doubt the purity of
its German breed, and I think there is English blood in him. He stands
well on his legs, but he trots high, and may cut himself, which requires
attention to be paid to his shoeing. He is tractable; and as I made him
turn round and change his feet, I found him quick and ready in doing
so.”

“Well said, M. de Malicorne,” exclaimed the comte; “you are a judge of
horses, I perceive;” then, turning towards him again, he continued, “you
are most becomingly dressed, M. de Malicorne. That is not a provincial
cut, I presume. Such a style of dress is not to be met with at Tours or
Orleans.”

“No, monsieur le comte; my clothes were made at Paris.”

“There is no doubt about that. But let us resume our own affair.
Manicamp wishes for the appointment of a second maid of honor.”

“You perceive what he has written, monsieur le comte.”

“For whom was the first appointment?”

Malicorne felt the color rise in his face as he answered hurriedly.

“A charming maid of honor, Mademoiselle de Montalais.”

“Ah, ah! you are acquainted with her?”

“We are affianced, or nearly so.”

“That is quite another thing, then; a thousand compliments,” exclaimed
De Guiche, upon whose lips a courtier’s jest was already fitting, but
to whom the word “affianced,” addressed by Malicorne with respect to
Mademoiselle de Montalais, recalled the respect due to women.

“And for whom is the second appointment destined?” asked De Guiche; “is
it for anyone to whom Manicamp may happen to be affianced? In that case
I pity her, poor girl! for she will have a sad fellow for a husband.”

“No, monsieur le comte; the second appointment is for Mademoiselle de la
Baume le Blanc de la Valliere.”

“Unknown,” said De Guiche.

“Unknown? yes, monsieur,” said Malicorne, smiling in his turn.

“Very good. I will speak to Monsieur about it. By the by, she is of
gentle birth?”

“She belongs to a very good family and is maid of honor to Madame.”

“That’s well. Will you accompany me to Monsieur?”

“Most certainly, if I may be permitted the honor.”

“Have you your carriage?”

“No; I came here on horseback.”

“Dressed as you are?”

“No, monsieur; I posted from Orleans, and I changed my traveling suit
for the one I have on, in order to present myself to you.”

“True, you already told me you had come from Orleans;” saying which he
crumpled Manicamp’s letter in his hand, and thrust it in his pocket.

“I beg your pardon,” said Malicorne, timidly; “but I do not think you
have read all.”

“Not read all, do you say?”

“No; there were two letters in the same envelope.”

“Oh! are you sure?”

“Quite sure.”

“Let us look, then,” said the count, as he opened the letter again.

“Ah! you are right,” he said opening the paper which he had not yet
read.

“I suspected it,” he continued--“another application for an appointment
under Monsieur. This Manicamp is a regular vampire:--he is carrying on a
trade in it.”

“No, monsieur le comte, he wishes to make a present of it.”

“To whom?”

“To myself, monsieur.”

“Why did you not say so at once, my dear M. Mauvaisecorne?”

“Malicorne, monsieur le comte.”

“Forgive me; it is that Latin that bothers me--that terrible mine of
etymologies. Why the deuce are young men of family taught Latin? _Mala_
and _mauvaise_--you understand it is the same thing. You will forgive
me, I trust, M. de Malicorne.”

“Your kindness affects me much, monsieur: but it is a reason why I
should make you acquainted with one circumstance without any delay.”

“What is it?”

“That I was not born a gentleman. I am not without courage, and not
altogether deficient in ability; but my name is Malicorne simply.”

“You appear to me, monsieur!” exclaimed the count, looking at the astute
face of his companion, “to be a most agreeable man. Your face pleases
me, M. Malicorne, and you must possess some indisputably excellent
qualities to have pleased that egotistical Manicamp. Be candid and tell
me whether you are not some saint descended upon the earth.”

“Why so?”

“For the simple reason that he makes you a present of anything. Did you
not say that he intended to make you a present of some appointment in
the king’s household?”

“I beg your pardon, count; but, if I succeed in obtaining the
appointment, you, and not he, will have bestowed it on me.”

“Besides he will not have given it to you for nothing, I suppose. Stay,
I have it;--there is a Malicorne at Orleans who lends money to the
prince.”

“I think that must be my father, monsieur.”

“Ah! the prince has the father, and that terrible dragon of a Manicamp
has the son. Take care, monsieur, I know him. He will fleece you
completely.”

“The only difference is, that I lend without interest,” said Malicorne,
smiling.

“I was correct in saying you were either a saint or very much resembled
one. M. Malicorne, you shall have the post you want, or I will forfeit
my name.”

“Ah! monsieur le comte, what a debt of gratitude shall I not owe you?”
 said Malicorne, transported.

“Let us go to the prince, my dear M. Malicorne.” And De Guiche proceeded
toward the door, desiring Malicorne to follow him. At the very moment
they were about to cross the threshold, a young man appeared on the
other side. He was from twenty-four to twenty-five years of age, of pale
complexion, bright eyes and brown hair and eyebrows. “Good-day,” said
he, suddenly, almost pushing De Guiche back into the courtyard again.

“Is that you, De Wardes?--What! and booted, spurred and whip in hand,
too?”

“The most befitting costume for a man about to set off for Le Havre.
There will be no one left in Paris to-morrow.” And hereupon he saluted
Malicorne with great ceremony, whose handsome dress gave him the
appearance of a prince.

“M. Malicorne,” said De Guiche to his friend. De Wardes bowed.

“M. de Wardes,” said Guiche to Malicorne, who bowed in return. “By the
by, De Wardes,” continued De Guiche, “you who are so well acquainted
with these matters, can you tell us, probably, what appointments are
still vacant at the court; or rather in the prince’s household?”

“In the prince’s household,” said De Wardes looking up with an air of
consideration, “let me see--the appointment of the master of the horse
is vacant, I believe.”

“Oh,” said Malicorne, “there is no question of such a post as that,
monsieur; my ambition is not nearly so exalted.”

De Wardes had a more penetrating observation than De Guiche, and
fathomed Malicorne immediately. “The fact is,” he said, looking at him
from head to foot, “a man must be either a duke or a peer to fill that
post.”

“All I solicit,” said Malicorne, “is a very humble appointment; I am of
little importance, and I do not rank myself above my position.”

“M. Malicorne, whom you see here,” said De Guiche to De Wardes, “is a
very excellent fellow, whose only misfortune is that of not being of
gentle birth. As far as I am concerned, you know, I attach little value
to those who have but gentle birth to boast of.”

“Assuredly,” said De Wardes; “but will you allow me to remark, my dear
count, that, without rank of some sort, one can hardly hope to belong to
his royal highness’s household?”

“You are right,” said the count, “court etiquette is absolute. The
devil!--we never so much as gave it a thought.”

“Alas! a sad misfortune for me, monsieur le comte,” said Malicorne,
changing color.

“Yet not without remedy, I hope,” returned De Guiche.

“The remedy is found easily enough,” exclaimed De Wardes; “you can be
created a gentleman. His Eminence, the Cardinal Mazarin, did nothing
else from morning till night.”

“Hush, hush, De Wardes,” said the count; “no jests of that kind; it ill
becomes us to turn such matters into ridicule. Letters of nobility, it
is true, are purchasable; but that is a sufficient misfortune without
the nobles themselves laughing at it.”

“Upon my word, De Guiche, you’re quite a Puritan, as the English say.”

At this moment the Vicomte de Bragelonne was announced by one of the
servants in the courtyard, in precisely the same manner as he would have
done in a room.

“Come here, my dear Raoul. What! you, too, booted and spurred? You are
setting off, then?”

Bragelonne approached the group of young men, and saluted them with that
quiet and serious manner peculiar to him. His salutation was principally
addressed to De Wardes, with whom he was unacquainted, and whose
features, on his perceiving Raoul, had assumed a strange sternness
of expression. “I have come, De Guiche,” he said, “to ask your
companionship. We set off for Le Havre, I presume.”

“This is admirable--delightful. We shall have a most enjoyable journey.
M. Malicorne, M. Bragelonne--ah! M. de Wardes, let me present you.” The
young men saluted each other in a restrained manner. Their very natures
seemed, from the beginning, disposed to take exception to each other. De
Wardes was pliant, subtle, full of dissimulation; Raoul was calm, grave,
and upright. “Decide between us--between De Wardes and myself, Raoul.”

“Upon what subject?”

“Upon the subject of noble birth.”

“Who can be better informed on that subject than a De Gramont?”

“No compliments; it is your opinion I ask.”

“At least, inform me of the subject under discussion.”

“De Wardes asserts that the distribution of titles is abused; I, on
the contrary, maintain that a title is useless to the man on whom it is
bestowed.”

“And you are correct,” said Bragelonne, quietly.

“But, monsieur le vicomte,” interrupted De Wardes, with a kind of
obstinacy, “I affirm that it is I who am correct.”

“What was your opinion, monsieur?”

“I was saying that everything is done in France at the present moment,
to humiliate men of family.”

“And by whom?”

“By the king himself. He surrounds himself with people who cannot show
four quarterings.”

“Nonsense,” said De Guiche, “where could you possibly have seen that, De
Wardes?”

“One example will suffice,” he returned, directing his look fully upon
Raoul.

“State it then.”

“Do you know who has just been nominated captain-general of the
musketeers?--an appointment more valuable than a peerage; for it gives
precedence over all the marechals of France.”

Raoul’s color mounted in his face; for he saw the object De Wardes had
in view. “No; who has been appointed? In any case it must have been
very recently, for the appointment was vacant eight days ago; a proof of
which is, that the king refused Monsieur, who solicited the post for one
of his _proteges_.”

“Well, the king refused it to Monsieur’s _protege_, in order to bestow
it upon the Chevalier d’Artagnan, a younger brother of some Gascon
family, who has been trailing his sword in the ante-chambers during the
last thirty years.”

“Forgive me if I interrupt you,” said Raoul, darting a glance full
of severity at De Wardes; “but you give me the impression of being
unacquainted with the gentleman of whom you are speaking.”

“I not acquainted with M. d’Artagnan? Can you tell me, monsieur, who
does _not_ know him?”

“Those who _do_ know him, monsieur,” replied Raoul, with still greater
calmness and sternness of manner, “are in the habit of saying, that if
he is not as good a gentleman as the king--which is not his fault--he is
the equal of all the kings of the earth in courage and loyalty. Such is
my opinion, monsieur; and I thank heaven I have known M. d’Artagnan from
my birth.”

De Wardes was about to reply, when De Guiche interrupted him.



Chapter VII. The Portrait of Madame.

The discussion was becoming full of bitterness. De Guiche perfectly
understood the whole matter, for there was in Bragelonne’s face a look
instinctively hostile, while in that of De Wardes there was something
like a determination to offend. Without inquiring into the different
feelings which actuated his two friends, De Guiche resolved to ward off
the blow which he felt was on the point of being dealt by one of them,
and perhaps by both. “Gentlemen,” he said, “we must take our leave
of each other, I must pay a visit to Monsieur. You, De Wardes, will
accompany me to the Louvre, and you, Raoul, will remain here master of
the house; and as all that is done here is under your advice, you will
bestow the last glance upon my preparations for departure.”

Raoul, with the air of one who neither seeks nor fears a quarrel, bowed
his head in token of assent, and seated himself upon a bench in the sun.
“That is well,” said De Guiche, “remain where you are, Raoul, and tell
them to show you the two horses I have just purchased; you will give me
your opinion, for I only bought them on condition that you ratified the
purchase. By the by, I have to beg your pardon for having omitted to
inquire after the Comte de la Fere.” While pronouncing these latter
words, he closely observed De Wardes, in order to perceive what effect
the name of Raoul’s father would produce upon him. “I thank you,”
 answered the young man, “the count is very well.” A gleam of deep hatred
passed into De Wardes’s eyes. De Guiche, who appeared not to notice the
foreboding expression, went up to Raoul, and grasping him by the hand,
said,--“It is agreed, then, Bragelonne, is it not, that you will rejoin
us in the courtyard of the Palais Royal?” He then signed to De Wardes to
follow him, who had been engaged in balancing himself first on one foot,
then on the other. “We are going,” said he, “come, M. Malicorne.”
 This name made Raoul start; for it seemed that he had already heard it
pronounced before, but he could not remember on what occasion.
While trying to recall it half-dreamily, yet half-irritated at his
conversation with De Wardes, the three young men set out on their way
towards the Palais Royal, where Monsieur was residing. Malicorne learned
two things; the first, that the young men had something to say to each
other; and the second, that he ought not to walk in the same line with
them; and therefore he walked behind. “Are you mad?” said De Guiche
to his companion, as soon as they had left the Hotel de Grammont; “you
attack M. d’Artagnan, and that, too, before Raoul.”

“Well,” said De Wardes, “what then?”

“What do you mean by ‘what then?’”

“Certainly, is there any prohibition against attacking M. d’Artagnan?”

“But you know very well that M. d’Artagnan was one of those celebrated
and terrible four men who were called the musketeers.”

“That they may be; but I do not perceive why, on that account, I should
be forbidden to hate M. d’Artagnan.”

“What cause has he given you?”

“Me! personally, none.”

“Why hate him, therefore?”

“Ask my dead father that question.”

“Really, my dear De Wardes, you surprise me. M. d’Artagnan is not one to
leave unsettled any _enmity_ he may have to arrange, without completely
clearing his account. Your father, I have heard, carried matters with a
high hand. Moreover, there are no enmities so bitter that they cannot be
washed away by blood, by a good sword-thrust loyally given.”

“Listen to me, my dear De Guiche, this inveterate dislike existed
between my father and M. d’Artagnan, and when I was quite a child,
he acquainted me with the reason for it, and, as forming part of my
inheritance, I regard it as a particular legacy bestowed upon me.”

“And does this hatred concern M. d’Artagnan alone?”

“As for that, M. d’Artagnan was so intimately associated with his three
friends, that some portion of the full measure of my hatred falls to
their lot, and that hatred is of such a nature, whenever the opportunity
occurs, they shall have no occasion to complain of their allowance.”

De Guiche had kept his eyes fixed on De Wardes, and shuddered at
the bitter manner in which the young man smiled. Something like a
presentiment flashed across his mind; he knew that the time had passed
away for _grands coups entre gentilshommes_; but that the feeling of
hatred treasured up in the mind, instead of being diffused abroad, was
still hatred all the same; that a smile was sometimes as full of meaning
as a threat; and, in a word, that to the fathers who had hated with
their hearts and fought with their arms, would now succeed the sons, who
would indeed hate with their hearts, but would no longer combat their
enemies save by means of intrigue or treachery. As, therefore, it
certainly was not Raoul whom he could suspect either of intrigue or
treachery, it was on Raoul’s account that De Guiche trembled. However,
while these gloomy forebodings cast a shade of anxiety over De Guiche’s
countenance, De Wardes had resumed the entire mastery over himself.

“At all events,” he observed, “I have no personal ill-will towards M. de
Bragelonne; I do not know him even.”

“In any case,” said De Guiche, with a certain amount of severity in his
tone of voice, “do not forget one circumstance, that Raoul is my most
intimate friend;” a remark at which De Wardes bowed.

The conversation terminated there, although De Guiche tried his
utmost to draw out his secret from him; but, doubtless, De Wardes had
determined to say nothing further, and he remained impenetrable. De
Guiche therefore promised himself a more satisfactory result with Raoul.
In the meantime they had reached the Palais Royal, which was surrounded
by a crowd of lookers-on. The household belonging to Monsieur awaited
his command to mount their horses, in order to form part of the escort
of the ambassadors, to whom had been intrusted the care of bringing the
young princess to Paris. The brilliant display of horses, arms, and
rich liveries, afforded some compensation in those times, thanks to the
kindly feelings of the people, and to the traditions of deep devotion
to their sovereigns, for the enormous expenses charged upon the taxes.
Mazarin had said: “Let them sing, provided they pay;” while Louis XIV.’s
remark was, “Let them look.” Sight had replaced the voice; the people
could still look but they were no longer allowed to sing. De Guiche left
De Wardes and Malicorne at the bottom of the grand staircase, while
he himself, who shared the favor and good graces of Monsieur with the
Chevalier de Lorraine, who always smiled at him most affectionately,
though he could not endure him, went straight to the prince’s
apartments, whom he found engaged in admiring himself in the glass, and
rouging his face. In a corner of the cabinet, the Chevalier de Lorraine
was extended full length upon some cushions, having just had his long
hair curled, with which he was playing in the same manner a woman would
have done. The prince turned round as the count entered, and perceiving
who it was, said: “Ah! is that you, De Guiche; come here and tell me the
truth.”

“You know, my lord, it is one of my defects to speak the truth.”

“You will hardly believe, De Guiche, how that wicked chevalier has
annoyed me.”

The chevalier shrugged his shoulders.

“Why, he pretends,” continued the prince, “that Mademoiselle Henrietta
is better looking as a woman than I am as a man.”

“Do not forget, my lord,” said De Guiche, frowning slightly, “you
require me to speak the truth.”

“Certainly,” said the prince, tremblingly.

“Well, and I shall tell it you.”

“Do not be in a hurry, Guiche,” exclaimed the prince, “you have plenty
of time; look at me attentively, and try to recollect Madame. Besides,
her portrait is here. Look at it.” And he held out to him a miniature of
the finest possible execution. De Guiche took it, and looked at it for a
long time attentively.

“Upon my honor, my lord, this is indeed a most lovely face.”

“But look at me, count, look at me,” said the prince, endeavoring to
direct upon himself the attention of the count, who was completely
absorbed in contemplation of the portrait.

“It is wonderful,” murmured Guiche.

“Really one would imagine you had never seen the young lady before.”

“It is true, my lord, I have seen her but it was five years ago; there
is a great difference between a child twelve years old, and a girl of
seventeen.”

“Well, what is your opinion?”

“My opinion is that the portrait must be flattering, my lord.”

“Of that,” said the prince triumphantly, “there can be no doubt; but let
us suppose that it is not, what would your opinion be?”

“My lord, that your highness is exceedingly happy to have so charming a
bride.”

The Chevalier de Lorraine burst out laughing. The prince understood how
severe towards himself this opinion of the Comte de Guiche was, and he
looked somewhat displeased, saying, “My friends are not over indulgent.”
 De Guiche looked at the portrait again, and, after lengthened
contemplation, returned it with apparent unwillingness, saying, “Most
decidedly, my lord, I should rather prefer to look ten times at your
highness, than to look at Madame once again.” It seemed as if the
chevalier had detected some mystery in these words, which were
incomprehensible to the prince, for he exclaimed: “Very well, get
married yourself.” Monsieur continued painting himself, and when he
had finished, looked at the portrait again once more, turned to admire
himself in the glass, and smiled, and no doubt was satisfied with the
comparison. “You are very kind to have come,” he said to Guiche, “I
feared you would leave without bidding me adieu.”

“Your highness knows me too well to believe me capable of so great a
disrespect.”

“Besides, I suppose you have something to ask from me before leaving
Paris?”

“Your highness has indeed guessed correctly, for I have a request to
make.”

“Very good, what is it?”

The Chevalier de Lorraine immediately displayed the greatest attention,
for he regarded every favor conferred upon another as a robbery
committed against himself. And, as Guiche hesitated, the prince said:
“If it be money, nothing could be more fortunate, for I am in funds; the
superintendent of the finances has sent me 500,000 pistoles.”

“I thank your highness; but is not an affair of money.”

“What is it, then? Tell me.”

“The appointment of a maid of honor.”

“Oh! oh! Guiche, what a protector you have become of young ladies,” said
the prince, “you never speak of any one else now.”

The Chevalier de Lorraine smiled, for he knew very well that nothing
displeased the prince more than to show any interest in ladies. “My
lord,” said the comte, “it is not I who am directly interested in the
lady of whom I have just spoken; I am acting on behalf of one of my
friends.”

“Ah! that is different; what is the name of the young lady in whom your
friend is so interested?”

“Mlle. de la Baume le Blanc de la Valliere; she is already maid of honor
to the dowager princess.”

“Why, she is lame,” said the Chevalier de Lorraine, stretching himself
on his cushions.

“Lame,” repeated the prince, “and Madame to have her constantly before
her eyes? Most certainly not; it may be dangerous for her when in an
interesting condition.”

The Chevalier de Lorraine burst out laughing.

“Chevalier,” said Guiche, “your conduct is ungenerous; while I am
soliciting a favor, you do me all the mischief you can.”

“Forgive me, comte,” said the Chevalier de Lorraine, somewhat uneasy at
the tone in which Guiche had made his remark, “but I had no intention of
doing so, and I begin to believe that I have mistaken one young lady for
another.”

“There is no doubt of it, monsieur; and I do not hesitate to declare
that such is the case.”

“Do you attach much importance to it, Guiche?” inquired the prince.

“I do, my lord.”

“Well, you shall have it; but ask me for no more appointments, for there
are none to give away.”

“Ah!” exclaimed the chevalier, “midday already, that is the hour fixed
for the departure.”

“You dismiss me, monsieur?” inquired Guiche.

“Really, count, you treat me very ill to-day,” replied the chevalier.

“For heaven’s sake, count, for heaven’s sake, chevalier,” said Monsieur,
“do you not see how you are distressing me?”

“Your highness’s signature?” said Guiche.

“Take a blank appointment from that drawer, and give it to me.” Guiche
handed the prince the document indicated, and at the same time presented
him with a pen already dipped in ink; whereupon the prince signed.
“Here,” he said, returning him the appointment, “but I give it on one
condition.”

“Name it.”

“That you make friends with the chevalier.”

“Willingly,” said Guiche. And he held out his hand to the chevalier with
an indifference amounting to contempt.

“Adieu, count,” said the chevalier, without seeming in any way to have
noticed the count’s slight; “adieu, and bring us back a princess who
will not talk with her own portrait too much.”

“Yes, set off and lose no time. By the by, who will accompany you?”

“Bragelonne and De Wardes.”

“Both excellent and fearless companions.”

“Too fearless,” said the chevalier; “endeavor to bring them both back,
count.”

“A bad heart, bad!” murmured De Guiche; “he scents mischief everywhere,
and sooner than anything else.” And taking leave of the prince, he
quitted the apartment. As soon as he reached the vestibule, he waved
in the air the paper which the prince had signed. Malicorne hurried
forward, and received it, trembling with delight. When, however, he held
in his hand, Guiche observed that he still awaited something further.

“Patience, monsieur,” he said; “the Chevalier de Lorraine was there,
and I feared an utter failure if I asked too much at once. Wait until I
return. Adieu.”

“Adieu, monsieur le comte; a thousand thanks,” said Malicorne.

“Send Manicamp to me. By the way, monsieur, is it true that Mlle. de la
Valliere is lame?” As he said this, he noticed that Bragelonne, who had
just at that moment entered the courtyard, turned suddenly pale. The
poor lover had heard the remark, which, however, was not the case with
Malicorne, for he was already beyond the reach of the count’s voice.

“Why is Louise’s name spoken of here,” said Raoul to himself; “oh! let
not De Wardes, who stands smiling yonder, even say a word about her in
my presence.”

“Now, gentlemen,” exclaimed the Comte de Guiche, “prepare to start.”

At this moment the prince, who had complete his toilette, appeared at
the window, and was immediately saluted by the acclamations of all who
composed the escort, and ten minutes afterwards, banners, scarfs,
and feathers were fluttering and waving in the air, as the cavalcade
galloped away.



Chapter VIII. Le Havre.

This brilliant and animated company, the members of which were inspired
by various feelings, arrived at Le Havre four days after their
departure from Paris. It was about five o’clock in the afternoon, and no
intelligence had yet been received of Madame. They were soon engaged in
quest of apartments; but the greatest confusion immediately ensued among
the masters, and violent quarrels among their attendants. In the midst
of this disorder, the Comte de Guiche fancied he recognized Manicamp. It
was, indeed, Manicamp himself; but as Malicorne had taken possession of
his very best costume, he had not been able to get any other than a suit
of violet velvet, trimmed with silver. Guiche recognized him as much by
his dress as by his features, for he had very frequently seen Manicamp
in his violet suit, which was his last resource. Manicamp presented
himself to the count under an arch of torches, which set in a blaze,
rather than illuminated, the gate by which Le Havre is entered, and
which is situated close to the tower of Francis I. The count, remarking
the woe-begone expression of Manicamp’s face, could not resist laughing.
“Well, my poor Manicamp,” he exclaimed, “how violet you look; are you in
mourning?”

“Yes,” replied Manicamp; “I am in mourning.”

“For whom, or for what?”

“For my blue-and-gold suit, which has disappeared, and in the place of
which I could find nothing but this; and I was even obliged to economize
from compulsion, in order to get possession of it.”

“Indeed?”

“It is singular you should be astonished at that, since you leave me
without any money.”

“At all events, here you are, and that is the principal thing.”

“By the most horrible roads.”

“Where are you lodging?”

“Lodging?”

“Yes!”

“I am not lodging anywhere.”

De Guiche began to laugh. “Well,” said he, “where do you intend to
lodge?”

“In the same place you do.”

“But I don’t know, myself.”

“What do you mean by saying you don’t know?”

“Certainly, how is it likely I should know where I should stay?”

“Have you not retained an hotel?”

“I?”

“Yes, you or the prince.”

“Neither of us has thought of it. Le Havre is of considerable size,
I suppose; and provided I can get a stable for a dozen horses, and a
suitable house in a good quarter--”

“Certainly, there are some very excellent houses.”

“Well then--”

“But not for us.”

“What do you mean by saying not for us?--for whom, then?”

“For the English, of course.”

“For the English?”

“Yes; the houses are all taken.”

“By whom?”

“By the Duke of Buckingham.”

“I beg your pardon?” said Guiche, whose attention this name had
awakened.

“Yes, by the Duke of Buckingham. His Grace was preceded by a courier,
who arrived here three days ago, and immediately retained all the houses
fit for habitation the town possesses.”

“Come, come, Manicamp, let us understand each other.”

“Well, what I have told you is clear enough, it seems to me.”

“But surely Buckingham does not occupy the whole of Le Havre?”

“He certainly does not occupy it, since he has not yet arrived; but,
once disembarked, he will occupy it.”

“Oh! oh!”

“It is quite clear you are not acquainted with the English; they have a
perfect rage for monopolizing everything.”

“That may be; but a man who has the whole of one house, is satisfied
with it, and does not require two.”

“Yes, but two men?”

“Be it so; for two men, two houses, or four or six, or ten, if you like;
but there are a hundred houses at Le Havre.”

“Yes, and all the hundred are let.”

“Impossible!”

“What an obstinate fellow you are. I tell you Buckingham has hired all
the houses surrounding the one which the queen dowager of England and
the princess her daughter will inhabit.”

“He is singular enough, indeed,” said De Wardes, caressing his horse’s
neck.

“Such is the case, however, monsieur.”

“You are quite sure of it, Monsieur de Manicamp?” and as he put this
question, he looked slyly at De Guiche, as though to interrogate him
upon the degree of confidence to be placed in his friend’s state of
mind. During this discussion the night had closed in, and the torches,
pages, attendants, squires, horses, and carriages, blocked up the gate
and the open place; the torches were reflected in the channel, which the
rising tide was gradually filling, while on the other side of the jetty
might be noticed groups of curious lookers-on, consisting of sailors and
townspeople, who seemed anxious to miss nothing of the spectacle. Amidst
all this hesitation of purpose, Bragelonne, as though a perfect stranger
to the scene, remained on his horse somewhat in the rear of Guiche, and
watched the rays of light reflected on the water, inhaling with rapture
the sea breezes, and listening to the waves which noisily broke upon the
shore and on the beach, tossing the spray into the air with a noise
that echoed in the distance. “But,” exclaimed De Guiche, “what is
Buckingham’s motive for providing such a supply of lodgings?”

“Yes, yes,” said De Wardes; “what reason has he?”

“A very excellent one,” replied Manicamp.

“You know what it is, then?”

“I fancy I do.”

“Tell us, then.”

“Bend your head down towards me.”

“What! may it not be spoken except in private?”

“You shall judge of that yourself.”

“Very well.” De Guiche bent down.

“Love,” said Manicamp.

“I do not understand you at all.”

“Say rather, you cannot understand me yet.”

“Explain yourself.”

“Very well; it is quite certain, count, that his royal highness will be
the most unfortunate of husbands.”

“What do you mean?”

“The Duke of Buckingham--”

“It is a name of ill omen to the princes of the house of France.”

“And so the duke is madly in love with Madame, so the rumor runs, and
will have no one approach her but himself.”

De Guiche colored. “Thank you, thank you,” said he to Manicamp, grasping
his hand. Then, recovering himself, added, “Whatever you do, Manicamp,
be careful that this project of Buckingham’s is not made known to any
Frenchman here; for, if so, many a sword would be unsheathed in this
country that does not fear English steel.”

“But after all,” said Manicamp, “I have had no satisfactory proof given
me of the love in question, and it may be no more than an idle tale.”

“No, no,” said De Guiche, “it must be the truth;” and despite his
command over himself, he clenched his teeth.

“Well,” said Manicamp, “after all, what does it matter to you? What
does it matter to me whether the prince is to be what the late king
was? Buckingham the father for the queen, Buckingham the son for the
princess.”

“Manicamp! Manicamp!”

“It is a fact, or at least, everybody says so.”

“Silence!” cried the count.

“But why, silence?” said De Wardes; “it is a highly creditable
circumstance for the French nation. Are not you of my opinion, Monsieur
de Bragelonne?”

“To what circumstance do you allude?” inquired De Bragelonne with an
abstracted air.

“That the English should render homage to the beauty of our queens and
our princesses.”

“Forgive me, but I have not been paying attention to what has passed;
will you oblige me by explaining.”

“There is no doubt it was necessary that Buckingham the father should
come to Paris in order that his majesty, King Louis XIII., should
perceive that his wife was one of the most beautiful women of the French
court; and it seems necessary, at the present time, that Buckingham the
son should consecrate, by the devotion of his worship, the beauty of a
princess who has French blood in her veins. The fact of having inspired
a passion on the other side of the Channel will henceforth confer a
title to beauty on this.”

“Sir,” replied De Bragelonne, “I do not like to hear such matters
treated so lightly. Gentlemen like ourselves should be careful guardians
of the honor of our queens and our princesses. If we jest at them, what
will our servants do?”

“How am I to understand that?” said De Wardes, whose ears tingled at the
remark.

“In any way you chose, monsieur,” replied De Bragelonne, coldly.

“Bragelonne, Bragelonne,” murmured De Guiche.

“M. de Wardes,” exclaimed Manicamp, noticing that the young man had
spurred his horse close to the side of Raoul.

“Gentlemen, gentlemen,” said De Guiche, “do not set such an example in
public, in the street too. De Wardes, you are wrong.”

“Wrong; in what way, may I ask you?”

“You are wrong, monsieur, because you are always speaking ill of someone
or something,” replied Raoul, with undisturbed composure.

“Be indulgent, Raoul,” said De Guiche, in an undertone.

“Pray do not think of fighting, gentlemen!” said Manicamp, “before you
have rested yourselves; for in that case you will not be able to do
much.”

“Come,” said De Guiche, “forward, gentlemen!” and breaking through the
horses and attendants, he cleared the way for himself towards the center
of the square, through the crowd, followed by the whole cavalcade. A
large gateway looking out upon a courtyard was open; Guiche entered the
courtyard, and Bragelonne, De Wardes, Manicamp, and three or four other
gentlemen, followed him. A sort of council of war was held, and
the means to be employed for saving the dignity of the embassy were
deliberated upon. Bragelonne was of the opinion that the right of
priority should be respected, while De Wardes suggested that the town
should be sacked. This latter proposition appearing to Manicamp rather
premature, he proposed instead that they should first rest themselves.
This was the wisest thing to do, but, unhappily, to follow his advice,
two things were wanting; namely, a house and beds. De Guiche reflected
for awhile, and then said aloud, “Let him who loves me, follow me!”

“The attendants also?” inquired a page who had approached the group.

“Every one,” exclaimed the impetuous young man. “Manicamp, show us the
way to the house destined for her royal highness’s residence.”

Without in any way divining the count’s project, his friends followed
him, accompanied by a crowd of people, whose acclamations and delight
seemed a happy omen for the success of that project with which they were
yet unacquainted. The wind was blowing strongly from the harbor, and
moaning in fitful gusts.



Chapter IX. At Sea.

The following day was somewhat calmer, although the gale still
continued. The sun had, however, risen through a bank of orange clouds,
tingeing with its cheerful rays the crests of the black waves. Watch was
impatiently kept from the different look-outs. Towards eleven o’clock in
the morning a ship, with sails full set, was signalled as in view; two
others followed at the distance of about half a knot. They approached
like arrows shot from the bow of a skillful archer; and yet the sea ran
so high that their speed was as nothing compared to the rolling of the
billows in which the vessels were plunging first in one direction and
then in another. The English fleet was soon recognized by the line of
the ships, and by the color of their pennants; the one which had the
princess on board and carried the admiral’s flag preceded the others.

The rumor now spread that the princess was arriving. The whole French
court ran to the harbor, while the quays and jetties were soon covered
by crowds of people. Two hours afterwards, the other vessels had
overtaken the flagship, and the three, not venturing perhaps to enter
the narrow entrance of the harbor, cast anchor between Le Havre and La
Heve. When the maneuver had been completed, the vessel which bore
the admiral saluted France by twelve discharges of cannon, which were
returned, discharge for discharge, from Fort Francis I. Immediately
afterwards a hundred boats were launched; they were covered with the
richest stuffs, and destined for the conveyance of the different members
of the French nobility towards the vessels at anchor. But when it was
observed that even inside the harbor the boats were tossed to and fro,
and that beyond the jetty the waves rose mountains high, dashing upon
the shore with a terrible uproar, it was readily believed that not one
of those frail boats would be able with safety to reach a fourth part of
the distance between the shore and the vessels at anchor. A pilot-boat,
however, notwithstanding the wind and the sea, was getting ready to
leave the harbor, for the purpose of placing itself at the admiral’s
disposal.

De Guiche, who had been looking among the different boats for one
stronger than the others, which might offer a chance of reaching the
English vessels, perceiving the pilot-boat getting ready to start, said
to Raoul: “Do you not think, Raoul, that intelligent and vigorous men,
as we are, ought to be ashamed to retreat before the brute strength of
wind and waves?”

“That is precisely the very reflection I was silently making to myself,”
 replied Bragelonne.

“Shall we get into that boat, then, and push off? Will you come, De
Wardes?”

“Take care, or you will get drowned,” said Manicamp.

“And for no purpose,” said De Wardes, “for with the wind in your teeth,
as it will be, you will never reach the vessels.”

“You refuse, then?”

“Assuredly I do; I would willingly risk and lose my life in an encounter
against men,” he said, glancing at Bragelonne, “but as to fighting with
oars against waves, I have no taste for that.”

“And for myself,” said Manicamp, “even were I to succeed in reaching the
ships, I should not be indifferent to the loss of the only good dress
which I have left,--salt water would spoil it.”

“You, then, refuse also?” exclaimed De Guiche.

“Decidedly I do; I beg you to understand that most distinctly.”

“But,” exclaimed De Guiche, “look, De Wardes--look, Manicamp--look
yonder, the princesses are looking at us from the poop of the admiral’s
vessel.”

“An additional reason, my dear fellow, why we should not make ourselves
ridiculous by being drowned while they are looking on.”

“Is that your last word, Manicamp?”

“Yes.”

“And then yours, De Wardes?”

“Yes.”

“Then I go alone.”

“Not so,” said Raoul, “for I shall accompany you; I thought it was
understood I should do so.”

The fact is, that Raoul, uninfluenced by devotion, measuring the risk
they run, saw how imminent the danger was, but he willingly allowed
himself to accept a peril which De Wardes had declined.

The boat was about to set off when De Guiche called to the pilot.
“Stay,” said he: “we want two places in your boat;” and wrapping five or
six pistoles in paper, he threw them from the quay into the boat.

“It seems you are not afraid of salt water, young gentlemen.”

“We are afraid of nothing,” replied De Guiche.

“Come along, then.”

The pilot approached the side of the boat, and the two young men, one
after the other, with equal vivacity, jumped into the boat. “Courage, my
men,” said De Guiche; “I have twenty pistoles left in this purse, and as
soon as we reach the admiral’s vessel they shall be yours.” The sailors
bent themselves to their oars, and the boat bounded over the crest
of the waves. The interest taken in this hazardous expedition was
universal; the whole population of Le Havre hurried towards the jetties
and every look was directed towards the little bark; at one moment it
flew suspended on the crest of the foaming waves, then suddenly glided
downwards towards the bottom of a raging abyss, where it seemed utterly
lost. At the expiration of an hour’s struggling with the waves, it
reached the spot where the admiral’s vessel was anchored, and from the
side of which two boats had already been dispatched towards their aid.
Upon the quarter-deck of the flagship, sheltered by a canopy of velvet
and ermine, which was suspended by stout supports, Henriette, the queen
dowager, and the young princess--with the admiral, the Duke of Norfolk,
standing beside them--watched with alarm this slender bark, at one
moment tossed to the heavens, and the next buried beneath the waves, and
against whose dark sail the noble figures of the two French gentlemen
stood forth in relief like two luminous apparitions. The crew, leaning
against the bulwarks and clinging to the shrouds, cheered the courage
of the two daring young men, the skill of the pilot, and the strength of
the sailors. They were received at the side of the vessel by a shout of
triumph. The Duke of Norfolk, a handsome young man, from twenty-six
to twenty-eight years of age, advanced to meet them. De Guiche and
Bragelonne lightly mounted the ladder on the starboard side, and,
conducted by the Duke of Norfolk, who resumed his place near them, they
approached to offer their homage to the princess. Respect, and yet more,
a certain apprehension, for which he could not account, had hitherto
restrained the Comte de Guiche from looking at Madame attentively, who,
however, had observed him immediately, and had asked her mother, “Is not
that Monsieur in the boat yonder?” Madame Henriette, who knew Monsieur
better than her daughter did, smiled at the mistake her vanity had led
her into, and had answered, “No; it is only M. de Guiche, his favorite.”
 The princess, at this reply, was constrained to check an instinctive
tenderness of feeling which the courage displayed by the count had
awakened. At the very moment the princess had put this question to
her mother, De Guiche had, at last, summoned courage to raise his eyes
towards her and could compare the original with the portrait he had so
lately seen. No sooner had he remarked her pale face, her eyes so full
of animation, her beautiful nut-brown hair, her expressive lips, and her
every gesture, which, while betokening royal descent, seemed to thank
and to encourage him at one and the same time, than he was, for a
moment, so overcome, that, had it not been for Raoul, on whose arm
he leant, he would have fallen. His friend’s amazed look, and
the encouraging gesture of the queen, restored Guiche to his
self-possession. In a few words he explained his mission, explained
in what way he had become envoy of his royal highness; and saluted,
according to their rank and the reception they gave him, the admiral and
several of the English noblemen who were grouped around the princess.

Raoul was then presented, and was most graciously received; the share
that the Comte de la Fere had had in the restoration of Charles II. was
known to all; and, more than that, it was the comte who had been
charged with the negotiation of the marriage, by means of which the
granddaughter of Henry IV. was now returning to France. Raoul spoke
English perfectly, and constituted himself his friend’s interpreter with
the young English noblemen, who were indifferently acquainted with the
French language. At this moment, a young man came forward, of extremely
handsome features, and whose dress and arms were remarkable for their
extravagance of material. He approached the princesses, who were engaged
in conversation with the Duke of Norfolk, and, in a voice which ill
concealed his impatience, said, “It is now time to disembark, your royal
highness.” The younger of the princesses rose from her seat at this
remark, and was about to take the hand which the young nobleman extended
to her, with an eagerness which arose from a variety of motives, when
the admiral intervened between them, observing: “A moment, if you
please, my lord; it is not possible for ladies to disembark just now,
the sea is too rough; it is probable the wind may abate before sunset,
and the landing will not be effected, therefore, until this evening.”

“Allow me to observe, my lord,” said Buckingham, with an irritation of
manner which he did not seek to disguise, “you detain these ladies,
and you have no right to do so. One of them, unhappily, now belongs to
France, and you perceive that France claims them by the voice of her
ambassadors;” and at the same moment he indicated Raoul and Guiche, whom
he saluted.

“I cannot suppose that these gentlemen intend to expose the lives of
their royal highnesses,” replied the admiral.

“These gentlemen,” retorted Buckingham, “arrived here safely,
notwithstanding the wind; allow me to believe that the danger will not
be greater for their royal highnesses when the wind will be in their
favor.”

“These envoys have shown how great their courage is,” said the admiral.
“You may have observed that there was a great number of persons on shore
who did _not_ venture to accompany them. Moreover, the desire which they
had to show their respect with the least possible delay to Madame and
her illustrious mother, induced them to brave the sea, which is very
tempestuous to-day, even for sailors. These gentlemen, however, whom I
recommend as an example for my officers to follow, can hardly be so for
these ladies.”

Madame glanced at the Comte de Guiche, and perceived that his face was
burning with confusion. This look had escaped Buckingham, who had eyes
for nothing but Norfolk, of whom he was evidently very jealous; he
seemed anxious to remove the princesses from the deck of a vessel where
the admiral reigned supreme. “In that case,” returned Buckingham, “I
appeal to Madame herself.”

“And I, my lord,” retorted the admiral, “I appeal to my own conscience,
and to my own sense of responsibility. I have undertaken to convey
Madame safe and sound to France, and I shall keep my promise.”

“But, sir--” continued Buckingham.

“My lord, permit me to remind you that I command here.”

“Are you aware what you are saying, my lord?” replied Buckingham,
haughtily.

“Perfectly so; I therefore repeat it: I alone command here, all yield
obedience to me; the sea and the winds, the ships and men too.” This
remark was made in a dignified and authoritative manner. Raoul observed
its effect upon Buckingham, who trembled with anger from head to foot,
and leaned against one of the poles of the tent to prevent himself
falling; his eyes became suffused with blood, and the hand which he did
not need for his support wandered towards the hilt of his sword.

“My lord,” said the queen, “permit me to observe that I agree in every
particular with the Duke of Norfolk; if the heavens, instead of being
clouded as they are at the present moment, were perfectly serene and
propitious, we can still afford to bestow a few hours upon the officer
who has conducted us so successfully, and with such extreme attention,
to the French coast, where he is to take leave of us.”

Buckingham, instead of replying, seemed to seek counsel from the
expression of Madame’s face. She, however, half-concealed beneath the
thick curtains of the velvet and gold which sheltered her, had not
listened to the discussion, having been occupied in watching the Comte
de Guiche, who was conversing with Raoul. This was a fresh misfortune
for Buckingham, who fancied he perceived in Madame Henrietta’s look a
deeper feeling than that of curiosity. He withdrew, almost tottering in
his gait, and nearly stumbled against the mainmast of the ship.

“The duke has not acquired a steady footing yet,” said the queen-mother,
in French, “and that may possibly be his reason for wishing to find
himself on firm land again.”

The young man overheard this remark, turned suddenly pale, and, letting
his hands fall in great discouragement by his side, drew aside, mingling
in one sigh his old affection and his new hatreds. The admiral, however,
without taking any further notice of the duke’s ill-humor, led the
princesses into the quarter-deck cabin, where dinner had been served
with a magnificence worthy in every respect of his guests. The admiral
seated himself at the right hand of the princess, and placed the Comte
de Guiche on her left. This was the place Buckingham usually occupied;
and when he entered the cabin, how profound was his unhappiness to see
himself banished by etiquette from the presence of his sovereign, to a
position inferior to that which, by rank, he was entitled to. De Guiche,
on the other hand, paler still perhaps from happiness, than his rival
was from anger, seated himself tremblingly next to the princess, whose
silken robe, as it lightly touched him, caused a tremor of mingled
regret and happiness to pass through his whole frame. The repast
finished, Buckingham darted forward to hand Madame Henrietta from the
table; but this time it was De Guiche’s turn to give the duke a lesson.
“Have the goodness, my lord, from this moment,” said he, “not to
interpose between her royal highness and myself. From this moment,
indeed, her royal highness belongs to France, and when she deigns to
honor me by touching my hand it is the hand of Monsieur, the brother of
the king of France, she touches.”

And saying this, he presented his hand to Madame Henrietta with such
marked deference, and at the same time with a nobleness of mien so
intrepid, that a murmur of admiration rose from the English, whilst
a groan of despair escaped from Buckingham’s lips. Raoul, who loved,
comprehended it all. He fixed upon his friend one of those profound
looks which a bosom friend or mother can alone extend, either as
protector or guardian, over the one who is about to stray from the right
path. Towards two o’clock in the afternoon the sun shone forth anew, the
wind subsided, the sea became smooth as a crystal mirror, and the fog,
which had shrouded the coast, disappeared like a veil withdrawn before
it. The smiling hills of France appeared in full view, with their
numerous white houses rendered more conspicuous by the bright green of
the trees or the clear blue sky.



Chapter X. The Tents.

The admiral, as we have seen, was determined to pay no further attention
to Buckingham’s threatening glances and fits of passion. In fact, from
the moment they quitted England, he had gradually accustomed himself to
his behavior. De Guiche had not yet in any way remarked the animosity
which appeared to influence that young nobleman against him, but he
felt, instinctively, that there could be no sympathy between himself and
the favorite of Charles II. The queen-mother, with greater experience
and calmer judgment, perceived the exact position of affairs, and, as
she discerned its danger, was prepared to meet it, whenever the proper
moment should arrive. Quiet had been everywhere restored, except in
Buckingham’s heart; he, in his impatience, addressed himself to the
princess, in a low tone of voice: “For Heaven’s sake, madame, I implore
you to hasten your disembarkation. Do you not perceive how that insolent
Duke of Norfolk is killing me with his attentions and devotions to you?”

Henrietta heard this remark; she smiled, and without turning her head
towards him, but giving only to the tone of her voice that inflection of
gentle reproach, and languid impertinence, which women and princesses so
well know how to assume, she murmured, “I have already hinted, my lord,
that you must have taken leave of your senses.”

Not a single detail escaped Raoul’s attention; he heard both
Buckingham’s entreaty and the princess’s reply; he remarked Buckingham
retire, heard his deep sigh, and saw him pass a hand over his face. He
understood everything, and trembled as he reflected on the position
of affairs, and the state of the minds of those about him. At last the
admiral, with studied delay, gave the last orders for the departure of
the boats. Buckingham heard the directions given with such an exhibition
of delight that a stranger would really imagine the young man’s reason
was affected. As the Duke of Norfolk gave his commands, a large boat or
barge, decked with flags, and capable of holding about twenty rowers and
fifteen passengers, was slowly lowered from the side of the admiral’s
vessel. The barge was carpeted with velvet and decorated with coverings
embroidered with the arms of England, and with garlands of flowers; for,
at that time, ornamentation was by no means forgotten in these political
pageants. No sooner was this really royal boat afloat, and the rowers
with oars uplifted, awaiting, like soldiers presenting arms, the
embarkation of the princess, than Buckingham ran forward to the ladder
in order to take his place. His progress was, however, arrested by the
queen. “My lord,” she said, “it is hardly becoming that you should allow
my daughter and myself to land without having previously ascertained
that our apartments are properly prepared. I beg your lordship to be
good enough to precede us ashore, and to give directions that everything
be in proper order on our arrival.”

This was a fresh disappointment for the duke, and, still more so, since
it was so unexpected. He hesitated, colored violently, but could not
reply. He had thought he might be able to keep near Madame during the
passage to the shore, and, by this means, to enjoy to the very last
moment the brief period fortune still reserved for him. The order,
however, was explicit; and the admiral, who heard it given, immediately
called out, “Launch the ship’s gig.” His directions were executed with
that celerity which distinguishes every maneuver on board a man-of-war.

Buckingham, in utter hopelessness, cast a look of despair at the
princess, of supplication towards the queen, and directed a glance full
of anger towards the admiral. The princess pretended not to notice him,
while the queen turned aside her head, and the admiral laughed outright,
at the sound of which Buckingham seemed ready to spring upon him. The
queen-mother rose, and with a tone of authority said, “Pray set off,
sir.”

The young duke hesitated, looked around him, and with a last effort,
half-choked by contending emotions, said, “And you, gentlemen, M. de
Guiche and M. de Bragelonne, do not you accompany me?”

De Guiche bowed and said, “Both M. de Bragelonne and myself await her
majesty’s orders; whatever the commands she imposes on us, we shall obey
them.” Saying this, he looked towards the princess, who cast down her
eyes.

“Your grace will remember,” said the queen, “that M. de Guiche is here
to represent Monsieur; it is he who will do the honors of France, as
you have done those of England; his presence cannot be dispensed with;
besides, we owe him this slight favor for the courage he displayed in
venturing to seek us in such a terrible stress of weather.”

Buckingham opened his lips, as if he were about to speak, but, whether
thoughts or expressions failed him, not a syllable escaped them, and
turning away, as though out of his mind, he leapt from the vessel into
the boat. The sailors were just in time to catch hold of him to steady
themselves; for his weight and the rebound had almost upset the boat.

“His grace cannot be in his senses,” said the admiral aloud to Raoul.

“I am uneasy on the Duke’s account,” replied Bragelonne.

While the boat was advancing towards the shore, the duke kept his eyes
immovably fixed on the admiral’s ship, like a miser torn away from his
coffers, or a mother separated from her child, about to be lead away
to death. No one, however, acknowledged his signals, his frowns, or his
pitiful gestures. In very anguish of mind, he sank down in the boat,
burying his hands in his hair, whilst the boat, impelled by the
exertions of the merry sailors, flew over the waves. On his arrival he
was in such a state of apathy, that, had he not been received at the
harbor by the messenger whom he had directed to precede him, he would
hardly have had strength to ask his way. Having once, however, reached
the house which had been set apart for him, he shut himself up, like
Achilles in his tent. The barge bearing the princess quitted the
admiral’s vessel at the very moment Buckingham landed. It was followed
by another boat filled with officers, courtiers, and zealous friends.
Great numbers of the inhabitants of Le Havre, having embarked in
fishing-cobles and boats of every description, set off to meet the royal
barge. The cannon from the forts fired salutes, which were returned by
the flagship and the two other vessels, and the flashes from the
open mouths of the cannon floated in white fumes over the waves, and
disappeared in the clear blue sky.

The princess landed at the decorated quay. Bands of gay music greeted
her arrival, and accompanied her every step she took. During the time
she was passing through the center of town, and treading beneath her
delicate feet the richest carpets and the gayest flowers, which had been
strewn upon the ground, De Guiche and Raoul, escaping from their English
friends, hurried through the town and hastened rapidly towards the place
intended for the residence of Madame.

“Let us hurry forward,” said Raoul to De Guiche, “for if I read
Buckingham’s character aright, he will create some disturbance, when he
learns the result of our deliberations of yesterday.”

“Never fear,” said De Guiche, “De Wardes is there, who is determination
itself, while Manicamp is the very personification of the artless
gentleness.”

De Guiche was not, however, the less diligent on that account, and five
minutes afterwards they were within sight of the Hotel de Ville. The
first thing which struck them was the number of people assembled in
the square. “Excellent,” said De Guiche; “our apartments, I see, are
prepared.”

In fact, in front of the Hotel de Ville, upon the wide open space before
it, eight tents had been raised, surmounted by the flags of France and
England united. The hotel was surrounded by tents, as by a girdle
of variegated colors; ten pages and a dozen mounted troopers, for an
escort, mounted guard before the tents. It had a singularly curious
effect, almost fairy-like in its appearance. These tents had been
constructed during the night-time. Fitted up, within and without, with
the richest materials that De Guiche had been able to procure in Le
Havre, they completely encircled the Hotel de Ville. The only passage
which led to the steps of the hotel, and which was not inclosed by the
silken barricade, was guarded by two tents, resembling two pavilions,
the doorways of both of which opened towards the entrance. These two
tents were destined for De Guiche and Raoul; in whose absence they were
intended to be occupied, that of De Guiche by De Wardes, and that of
Raoul by Manicamp. Surrounding these two tents, and the six others, a
hundred officers, gentlemen, and pages, dazzling in their display of
silk and gold, thronged like bees buzzing about a hive. Every one of
them, their swords by their sides, was ready to obey the slightest sign
either of De Guiche or Bragelonne, the leaders of the embassy.

At the very moment the two young men appeared at the end of one of the
streets leading to the square, they perceived, crossing the square at
full gallop, a young man on horseback, whose costume was of surprising
richness. He pushed hastily thorough the crowd of curious lookers-on,
and, at the sight of these unexpected erections, uttered a cry of anger
and dismay. It was Buckingham, who had awakened from his stupor, in
order to adorn himself with a costume perfectly dazzling from its
beauty, and to await the arrival of the princess and the queen-mother
at the Hotel de Ville. At the entrance to the tents, the soldiers
barred his passage, and his further progress was arrested. Buckingham,
hopelessly infuriated, raised his whip; but his arm was seized by a
couple of officers. Of the two guardians of the tent, only one was
there. De Wardes was in the interior of the Hotel de Ville, engaging
in attending to the execution of some orders by De Guiche. At the noise
made by Buckingham, Manicamp, who was indolently reclining upon the
cushions at the doorway of one of the tents, rose with his usual
indifference, and, perceiving that the disturbance continued, made his
appearance from underneath the curtains. “What is the matter?” he said,
in a gentle tone of voice, “and who is making this disturbance?”

It so happened, that, at the moment he began to speak, silence had just
been restored, and, although his voice was very soft and gentle in its
touch, every one heard his question. Buckingham turned round, and looked
at the tall thin figure, and the listless expression of countenance of
his questioner. Probably the personal appearance of Manicamp, who was
dressed very plainly, did not inspire him with much respect, for he
replied disdainfully, “Who may you be, monsieur?”

Manicamp, leaning on the arm of a gigantic trooper, as firm as
the pillar of a cathedral, replied in his usual tranquil tone of
voice,--“And _you_, monsieur?”

“I, monsieur, am the Duke of Buckingham; I have hired all the houses
which surround the Hotel de Ville, where I have business to transact;
and as these houses are let, they belong to me, and, as I hired them in
order to preserve the right of free access to the Hotel de Ville, you
are not justified in preventing me passing to it.”

“But who prevents you passing, monsieur?” inquired Manicamp.

“Your sentinels.”

“Because you wish to pass on horseback, and orders have been given to
let only persons on foot pass.”

“No one has any right to give orders here, except myself,” said
Buckingham.

“On what grounds?” inquired Manicamp, with his soft tone. “Will you do
me the favor to explain this enigma to me?”

“Because, as I have already told you, I have hired all the houses
looking on the square.”

“We are very well aware of that, since nothing but the square itself has
been left for us.”

“You are mistaken, monsieur; the square belongs to me, as well as the
houses in it.”

“Forgive me, monsieur, but you are mistaken there. In _our_ country,
we say, the highway belongs to the king, therefore this square is his
majesty’s; and, consequently, as we are the king’s ambassadors, the
square belongs to us.”

“I have already asked you who you are, monsieur,” exclaimed Buckingham,
exasperated at the coolness of his interlocutor.

“My name is Manicamp,” replied the young man, in a voice whose tones
were as harmonious and sweet as the notes of an Aeolian harp.

Buckingham shrugged his shoulders contemptuously, and said, “When I
hired these houses which surround the Hotel de Ville, the square was
unoccupied; these barracks obstruct my sight; I hereby order them to be
removed.”

A hoarse and angry murmur ran through the crowd of listeners at these
words. De Guiche arrived at this moment; he pushed through the crowd
which separated him from Buckingham, and, followed by Raoul, arrived on
the scene of action from one side, just as De Wardes came up from the
other. “Pardon me, my lord; but if you have any complaint to make, have
the goodness to address it to me, inasmuch as it was I who supplied the
plans for the construction of these tents.”

“Moreover, I would beg you to observe, monsieur, that the term ‘barrack’
is a highly objectionable one!” added Manicamp, graciously.

“You were saying, monsieur--” continued De Guiche.

“I was saying, monsieur le comte,” resumed Buckingham, in a tone of
anger more marked than ever, although in some measure moderated by the
presence of an equal, “I was saying that it is impossible these tents
can remain where they are.”

“_Impossible!_” exclaimed De Guiche, “and why?”

“Because I object to them.”

A movement of impatience escaped De Guiche, but a warning glance from
Raoul restrained him.

“You should the less object to them, monsieur, on account of the abuse
of priority you have permitted yourself to exercise.”

“_Abuse!_”

“Most assuredly. You commission a messenger, who hires in your name the
whole of the town of Le Havre, without considering the members of the
French court, who would be sure to arrive here to meet Madame.
Your Grace will admit that this is hardly friendly conduct in the
representative of a friendly nation.”

“The right of possession belongs to him who is first on the ground.”

“Not in France, monsieur.”

“Why not in France?”

“Because France is a country where politeness is observed.”

“Which means?” exclaimed Buckingham, in so violent a manner that those
who were present drew back, expecting an immediate collision.

“Which means, monsieur,” replied De Guiche, now rather pale, “that
I caused these tents to be raised as habitations for myself and my
friends, as a shelter for the ambassadors of France, as the only place
of refuge which your exactions have left us in the town; and that I
and those who are with me, shall remain in them, at least, until an
authority more powerful, and more supreme, than your own shall dismiss
me from them.”

“In other words, until we are ejected, as the lawyers say,” observed
Manicamp, blandly.

“I know an authority, monsieur, which I trust is such as you will
respect,” said Buckingham, placing his hand on his sword.

At this moment, and as the goddess of Discord, inflaming all minds, was
about to direct their swords against each other, Raoul gently placed his
hand on Buckingham’s shoulder. “One word, my lord,” he said.

“My right, my right, first of all,” exclaimed the fiery young man.

“It is precisely upon that point I wish to have the honor of addressing
a word to you.”

“Very well, monsieur, but let your remarks be brief.”

“One question is all I ask; you can hardly expect me to be briefer.”

“Speak, monsieur, I am listening.”

“Are you, or is the Duke of Orleans, going to marry the granddaughter of
Henry IV.?”

“What do you mean?” exclaimed Buckingham, retreating a few steps,
bewildered.

“Have the goodness to answer me,” persisted Raoul tranquilly.

“Do you mean to ridicule me, monsieur?” inquired Buckingham.

“Your question is a sufficient answer for me. You admit, then, that it
is not you who are going to marry the princess?”

“You know it perfectly well, monsieur, I should imagine.”

“I beg your pardon, but your conduct has been such as to leave it not
altogether certain.”

“Proceed, monsieur, what do you mean to convey?”

Raoul approached the duke. “Are you aware, my lord,” he said, lowering
his voice, “that your extravagances very much resemble the excesses
of jealousy? These jealous fits, with respect to any woman, are not
becoming in one who is neither her lover nor her husband; and I am sure
you will admit that my remark applies with still greater force, when the
lady in question is a princess of the blood royal!”

“Monsieur,” exclaimed Buckingham, “do you mean to insult Madame
Henrietta?”

“Be careful, my lord,” replied Bragelonne, coldly, “for it is you who
insult her. A little while since, when on board the admiral’s ship,
you wearied the queen, and exhausted the admiral’s patience. I
was observing, my lord; and, at first, I concluded you were not
in possession of your senses, but I have since surmised the real
significance of your madness.”

“Monsieur!” exclaimed Buckingham.

“One moment more, for I have yet another word to add. I trust I am the
only one of my companions who has guessed it.”

“Are you aware, monsieur,” said Buckingham, trembling with mingled
feelings of anger and uneasiness, “are you aware that you are holding
language towards me which requires to be checked?”

“Weigh your words well, my lord,” said Raoul, haughtily; “my nature is
not such that its vivacities need checking; whilst you, on the contrary,
are descended from a race whose passions are suspected by all true
Frenchmen; I repeat, therefore, for the second time, be careful!”

“Careful of what, may I ask? Do you presume to threaten me?”

“I am the son of the Comte de la Fere, my lord, and I never threaten,
because I strike first. Therefore, understand me well, the threat that I
hold out to you is this--”

Buckingham clenched his hands, but Raoul continued, as though he had not
observed the gesture. “At the very first word, beyond the respect and
deference due to her royal highness, which you permit yourself to use
towards her,--be patient my lord, for I am perfectly so.”

“You?”

“Undoubtedly. So long as Madame remained on English territory, I held
my peace; but from the very moment she stepped on French ground, and now
that we have received her in the name of the prince, I warn you, that
at the first mark of disrespect which you, in your insane attachment,
exhibit towards the royal house of France, I shall have one of two
courses to follow;--either I declare, in the presence of every one, the
madness with which you are now affected, and I get you ignominiously
ordered back to England; or if you prefer it, I will run my dagger
through your throat in the presence of all here. This second alternative
seems to me the least disagreeable, and I think I shall hold to it.”

Buckingham had become paler than the lace collar around his neck. “M.
de Bragelonne,” he said, “is it, indeed, a gentleman who is speaking to
me?”

“Yes; only the gentleman is speaking to a madman. Get cured, my lord,
and he will hold quite another language to you.”

“But, M. de Bragelonne,” murmured the duke, in a voice, half-choked, and
putting his hand to his neck,--“Do you not see I am choking?”

“If your death were to take place at this moment, my lord,” replied
Raoul, with unruffled composure, “I should, indeed, regard it as a
great happiness, for this circumstance would prevent all kinds of evil
remarks; not alone about yourself, but also about those illustrious
persons whom your devotion is compromising in so absurd a manner.”

“You are right, you are right,” said the young man, almost beside
himself. “Yes, yes; better to die, than to suffer as I do at this
moment.” And he grasped a beautiful dagger, the handle of which was
inlaid with precious stones; and which he half drew from his breast.

Raoul thrust his hand aside. “Be careful what you do,” he said; “if you
do not kill yourself, you commit a ridiculous action; and if you were to
kill yourself, you sprinkle blood upon the nuptial robe of the princess
of England.”

Buckingham remained a minute gasping for breath; during this interval,
his lips quivered, his fingers worked convulsively, and his eyes
wandered, as though in delirium. Then suddenly, he said, “M. de
Bragelonne, I know nowhere a nobler mind than yours; you are, indeed,
a worthy son of the most perfect gentleman that ever lived. Keep your
tents.” And he threw his arms round Raoul’s neck. All who were present,
astounded at this conduct, which was the very reverse of what was
expected, considering the violence of the one adversary and the
determination of the other, began immediately to clap their hands, and
a thousand cheers and joyful shouts arose from all sides. De Guiche, in
his turn, embraced Buckingham somewhat against his inclination; but,
at all events, he did embrace him. This was the signal for French and
English to do the same; and they who, until that moment, had looked at
each other with restless uncertainty, fraternized on the spot. In the
meantime, the procession of the princess arrived, and had it not been
for Bragelonne, two armies would have been engaged together in conflict,
and blood would have been shed upon the flowers with which the ground
was covered. At the appearance, however, of the banners borne at the
head of the procession, complete order was restored.



Chapter XI. Night.

Concord returned to its place amidst the tents. English and French
rivaled each other in their devotion and courteous attention to the
illustrious travelers. The English forwarded to the French baskets
of flowers, of which they had made a plentiful provision to greet the
arrival of the young princess; the French in return invited the English
to a supper, which was to be given the next day. Congratulations were
poured in upon the princess everywhere during her journey. From the
respect paid her on all sides, she seemed like a queen; and from the
adoration with which she was treated by two or three; she appeared
an object of worship. The queen-mother gave the French the most
affectionate reception. France was her native country, and she had
suffered too much unhappiness in England for England to have made her
forget France. She taught her daughter, then, by her own affection
for it, that love for a country where they had both been hospitably
received, and where a brilliant future opened before them. After the
public entry was over, and the spectators in the streets had partially
dispersed, and the sound of the music and cheering of the crowd could be
heard only in the distance; when the night had closed in, wrapping with
its star-covered mantle the sea, the harbor, the town, and surrounding
country, De Guiche, still excited by the great events of the day,
returned to his tent, and seated himself upon one of the stools with so
profound an expression of distress that Bragelonne kept his eyes fixed
upon him, until he heard him sigh, and then he approached him. The count
had thrown himself back on his seat, leaning his shoulders against the
partition of the tent, and remained thus, his face buried in his hands,
with heaving chest and restless limbs.

“You are suffering?” asked Raoul.

“Cruelly.”

“Bodily, I suppose?”

“Yes; bodily.”

“This has indeed been a harassing day,” continued the young man, his
eyes fixed upon his friend.

“Yes; a night’s rest will probably restore me.”

“Shall I leave you?”

“No; I wish to talk to you.”

“You shall not speak to me, Guiche, until you have first answered my
questions.”

“Proceed then.”

“You will be frank with me?”

“I always am.”

“Can you imagine why Buckingham has been so violent?”

“I suspect.”

“Because he is in love with Madame, is it not?”

“One could almost swear to it, to observe him.”

“You are mistaken; there is nothing of the kind.”

“It is you who are mistaken, Raoul; I have read his distress in his
eyes, in his every gesture and action the whole day.”

“You are a poet, my dear count, and find subjects for your muse
everywhere.”

“I can perceive love clearly enough.”

“Where it does not exist?”

“Nay, where it does exist.”

“Do you not think you are deceiving yourself, Guiche?”

“I am convinced of what I say,” said the count.

“Now, inform me, count,” said Raoul, fixing a penetrating look upon him,
“what happened to render you so clear-sighted.”

Guiche hesitated for a moment, and then answered, “Self-love, I
suppose.”

“Self-love is a pedantic word, Guiche.”

“What do you mean?”

“I mean that, generally, you are less out of spirits than seems to be
the case this evening.”

“I am fatigued.”

“Listen to me, Guiche; we have been campaigners together; we have been
on horseback for eighteen hours at a time, and our horses dying from
exhaustion, or hunger, have fallen beneath us, and yet we have
laughed at our mishaps. Believe me, it is not fatigue that saddens you
to-night.”

“It is annoyance, then.”

“What annoyance?”

“That of this evening.”

“The mad conduct of the Duke of Buckingham, do you mean?”

“Of course; is it not vexations for us, the representatives of our
sovereign master, to witness the devotion of an Englishman to our future
mistress, the second lady in point of rank in the kingdom?”

“Yes, you are right; but I do not think any danger is to be apprehended
from Buckingham.”

“No; still he is intrusive. Did he not, on his arrival here, almost
succeed in creating a disturbance between the English and ourselves;
and, had it not been for you, for your admirable presence, for your
singular decision of character, swords would have been drawn in the very
streets of the town.”

“You observe, however, that he has changed his tactics.”

“Yes, certainly; but this is the very thing that amazes me so much. You
spoke to him in a low tone of voice, what did you say to him? You think
he loves her; you admit that such a passion does not give way readily.
He does not love her, then!” De Guiche pronounced the latter with so
marked an expression that Raoul raised his head. The noble character of
the young man’s countenance expressed a displeasure which could easily
be read.

“What I said to him, count,” replied Raoul, “I will repeat to you.
Listen to me. I said, ‘You are regarding with wistful feelings, and most
injurious desire, the sister of your prince,--her to whom you are
not affianced, who is not, who can never be anything to you; you are
outraging those who, like ourselves, have come to seek a young lady to
escort her to her husband.’”

“You spoke to him in that manner?” asked Guiche, coloring.

“In those very terms; I even added more. ‘How would you regard us,’
I said, ‘if you were to perceive among us a man mad enough, disloyal
enough, to entertain other than sentiments of the most perfect respect
for a princess who is the destined wife of our master?’”

These words were so applicable to De Guiche that he turned pale, and,
overcome by a sudden agitation, was barely able to stretch out one hand
mechanically towards Raoul, as he covered his eyes and face with the
other.

“But,” continued Raoul, not interrupted by this movement of his friend,
“Heaven be praised, the French, who are pronounced to be thoughtless
and indiscreet, reckless, even, are capable of bringing a calm and sound
judgment to bear on matters of such high importance. I added even
more, for I said, ‘Learn, my lord, that we gentlemen of France devote
ourselves to our sovereigns by sacrificing them our affections, as well
as our fortunes and our lives; and whenever it may chance to happen that
the tempter suggests one of those vile thoughts that set the heart on
fire, we extinguish the flame, even if it has to be done by shedding our
blood for the purpose. Thus it is that the honor of three is saved:
our country’s, our master’s, and our own. It is thus that we act, your
Grace; it is thus that every man of honor ought to act.’ In this
manner, my dear Guiche,” continued Bragelonne, “I addressed the Duke
of Buckingham; and he admitted I was right, and resigned himself
unresistingly to my arguments.”

De Guiche, who had hitherto sat leaning forward while Raoul was
speaking, drew himself up, his eyes glancing proudly; he seized Raoul’s
hand, his face, which had been as cold as ice, seemed on fire. “And you
spoke magnificently,” he said, in a half-choked voice; “you are indeed a
friend, Raoul. But now, I entreat you, leave me to myself.”

“Do you wish it?”

“Yes; I need repose. Many things have agitated me to-day, both in mind
and body; when you return to-morrow I shall no longer be the same man.”

“I leave you, then,” said Raoul, as he withdrew. The count advanced a
step towards his friend, and pressed him warmly in his arms. But in this
friendly pressure Raoul could detect the nervous agitation of a great
internal conflict.

The night was clear, starlit, and splendid; the tempest had passed away,
and the sweet influences of the evening had restored life, peace and
security everywhere. A few fleecy clouds were floating in the heavens,
and indicated from their appearance a continuance of beautiful weather,
tempered by a gentle breeze from the east. Upon the large square in
front of the hotel, the shadows of the tents, intersected by the golden
moonbeams, formed as it were a huge mosaic of jet and yellow flagstones.
Soon, however, the entire town was wrapped in slumber; a feeble light
still glimmered in Madame’s apartment, which looked out upon the square,
and the soft rays from the expiring lamp seemed to be the image of the
calm sleep of a young girl, hardly yet sensible of life’s anxieties, and
in whom the flame of existence sinks placidly as sleep steals over the
body.

Bragelonne quitted the tent with the slow and measured step of a man
curious to observe, but anxious not to be seen. Sheltered behind the
thick curtains of his own tent, embracing with a glance the whole
square, he noticed that, after a few moments’ pause, the curtains of De
Guiche’s tent were agitated, and then drawn partially aside. Behind them
he could perceive the shadow of De Guiche, his eyes, glittering in the
obscurity, fastened ardently upon the princess’s sitting apartment,
which was partially lighted by the lamp in the inner room. The soft
light which illumined the windows was the count’s star. The fervent
aspirations of his nature could be read in his eyes. Raoul, concealed
in the shadow, divined the many passionate thoughts that established,
between the tent of the young ambassador and the balcony of the
princess, a mysterious and magical bond of sympathy--a bond created by
thoughts imprinted with so much strength and persistence of will,
that they must have caused happy and loving dreams to alight upon the
perfumed couch, which the count, with the eyes of his soul, devoured so
eagerly.

But De Guiche and Raoul were not the only watchers. The window of one
of the houses looking on the square was opened too, the casement of the
house where Buckingham resided. By the aid of the rays of light which
issued from this latter, the profile of the duke could be distinctly
seen, as he indolently reclined upon the carved balcony with its velvet
hangings; he also was breathing in the direction of the princess’s
apartment his prayers and the wild visions of his love.

Raoul could not resist smiling, as thinking of Madame, he said to
himself, “Hers is, indeed, a heart well besieged;” and then added,
compassionately, as he thought of Monsieur, “and he is a husband well
threatened too; it is a good thing for him that he is a prince of such
high rank, that he has an army to safeguard for him that which is his
own.” Bragelonne watched for some time the conduct of the two lovers,
listened to the loud and uncivil slumbers of Manicamp, who snored as
imperiously as though he was wearing his blue and gold, instead of his
violet suit.

Then he turned towards the night breeze which bore towards him, he
seemed to think, the distant song of the nightingale; and, after having
laid in a due provision of melancholy, another nocturnal malady, he
retired to rest thinking, with regard to his own love affair, that
perhaps four or even a larger number of eyes, quite as ardent as those
of De Guiche and Buckingham, were coveting his own idol in the
chateau at Blois. “And Mademoiselle de Montalais is by no means a very
conscientious garrison,” said he to himself, sighing aloud.



Chapter XII. From Le Havre to Paris.

The next day the _fetes_ took place, accompanied by all the pomp and
animation that the resources of the town and the cheerful disposition of
men’s minds could supply. During the last few hours spent in Le Havre,
every preparation for the departure had been made. After Madame had
taken leave of the English fleet, and, once again, had saluted the
country in saluting its flags, she entered her carriage, surrounded by a
brilliant escort. De Guiche had hoped that the Duke of Buckingham
would accompany the admiral to England; but Buckingham succeeded in
demonstrating to the queen that there would be great impropriety in
allowing Madame to proceed to Paris, almost unprotected. As soon as it
had been settled that Buckingham was to accompany Madame, the young
duke selected a corps of gentlemen and officers to form part of his own
suite, so that it was almost an army that now set out towards Paris,
scattering gold, and exciting the liveliest demonstrations as they
passed through the different towns and villages on the route. The
weather was very fine. France is a beautiful country, especially along
the route by which the procession passed. Spring cast its flowers and
its perfumed foliage on their path. Normandy, with its vast variety of
vegetation, its blue skies and silver rivers, displayed itself in all
the loveliness of a paradise to the new sister of the king. _Fetes_ and
brilliant displays received them everywhere along the line of march.
De Guiche and Buckingham forgot everything; De Guiche in his anxiety to
prevent any fresh attempts on the part of the duke, and Buckingham, in
his desire to awaken in the heart of the princess a softer remembrance
of the country to which the recollection of many happy days belonged.
But, alas! the poor duke could perceive that the image of that country
so cherished by himself became, from day to day, more and more effaced
in Madame’s mind, in exact proportion as her affection for France became
more deeply engraved on her heart. In fact, it was not difficult to
perceive that his most devoted attention awakened no acknowledgement,
and that the grace with which he rode one of his most fiery horses was
thrown away, for it was only casually and by the merest accident that
the princess’s eyes were turned towards him. In vain did he try,
in order to fix upon himself one of those looks, which were thrown
carelessly around, or bestowed elsewhere, to produce in the animal he
rode its greatest display of strength, speed, temper and address; in
vain did he, by exciting his horse almost to madness, spur him, at the
risk of dashing himself in pieces against the trees, or of rolling in
the ditches, over the gates and barriers which they passed, or down the
steep declivities of the hills. Madame, whose attention had been aroused
by the noise, turned her head for a moment to observe the cause of it,
and then, slightly smiling, again entered into conversation with her
faithful guardians, Raoul and De Guiche, who were quietly riding at her
carriage doors. Buckingham felt himself a prey to all the tortures of
jealousy; an unknown, unheard of anguish glided through his veins, and
laid siege to his heart; and then, as if to show that he knew the
folly of his conduct, and that he wished to correct, by the humblest
submission, his flights of absurdity, he mastered his horse, and
compelled him, reeking with sweat and flecked with foam, to champ
his bit close beside the carriage, amidst the crowd of courtiers.
Occasionally he obtained a word from Madame as a recompense, and yet her
speech seemed almost a reproach.

“That is well, my lord,” she said, “now you are reasonable.”

Or from Raoul, “Your Grace is killing your horse.”

Buckingham listened patiently to Raoul’s remarks, for he instinctively
felt, without having had any proof that such was the case, that Raoul
checked the display of De Guiche’s feelings, and that, had it not
been for Raoul, some mad act or proceeding, either of the count, or
of Buckingham himself, would have brought about an open rupture, or a
disturbance--perhaps even exile itself. From the moment of that excited
conversation the two young men had held in front of the tents at Le
Havre, when Raoul made the duke perceive the impropriety of his conduct,
Buckingham felt himself attracted towards Raoul almost in spite of
himself. He often entered into conversation with him, and it was nearly
always to talk to him either of his father or of D’Artagnan, their
mutual friend, in whose praise Buckingham was nearly as enthusiastic as
Raoul. Raoul endeavored, as much as possible, to make the conversation
turn upon this subject in De Wardes’s presence, who had, during the
whole journey, been exceedingly annoyed at the superior position taken
by Bragelonne, and especially by his influence over De Guiche. De Wardes
had that keen and merciless penetration most evil natures possess; he
had immediately remarked De Guiche’s melancholy, and divined the nature
of his regard for the princess. Instead, however, of treating the
subject with the same reserve which Raoul practiced; instead of
regarding with that respect, which was their due, the obligations
and duties of society, De Wardes resolutely attacked in the count the
ever-sounding chord of juvenile audacity and pride. It happened one
evening, during a halt at Mantes, that while De Guiche and De Wardes
were leaning against a barrier, engaged in conversation, Buckingham and
Raoul were also talking together as they walked up and down. Manicamp
was engaged in devoted attendance on the princess, who already treated
him without reserve, on account of his versatile fancy, his frank
courtesy of manner, and conciliatory disposition.

“Confess,” said De Wardes, “that you are really ill, and that your
pedagogue of a friend has not succeeded in curing you.”

“I do not understand you,” said the count.

“And yet it is easy enough; you are dying of love.”

“You are mad, De Wardes.”

“Madness it would be, I admit, if Madame were really indifferent to your
martyrdom; but she takes so much notice of it, observes it to such an
extent, that she compromises herself, and I tremble lest, on our arrival
at Paris, M. de Bragelonne may not denounce both of you.”

“For shame, De Wardes, again attacking De Bragelonne.”

“Come, come, a truce to child’s play,” replied the count’s evil genius,
in an undertone; “you know as well as I do what I mean. Besides, you
must have observed how the princess’s glance softens as she looks at
you;--you can tell, by the very inflection of her voice, what pleasure
she takes in listening to you, and can feel how thoroughly she
appreciates the verses you recite to her. You cannot deny, too, that
every morning she tells you how indifferently she slept the previous
night.”

“True, De Wardes, quite true; but what good is there in your telling me
all that?”

“Is it not important to know the exact position of affairs?”

“No, no; not when I am a witness of things that are enough to drive one
mad.”

“Stay, stay,” said De Wardes; “look, she calls you,--do you understand?
Profit by the occasion, while your pedagogue is absent.”

De Guiche could not resist; an invincible attraction drew him towards
the princess. De Wardes smiled as he saw him withdraw.

“You are mistaken, monsieur,” said Raoul, suddenly stepping across
the barrier against which the previous moment the two friends had been
leaning. “The pedagogue is here, and has overheard you.”

De Wardes, at the sound of Raoul’s voice, which he recognized without
having occasion to look at him, half drew his sword.

“Put up your sword,” said Raoul; “you know perfectly well that, until
our journey is at an end, every demonstration of that nature is useless.
Why do you distill into the heart of the man you term your friend all
the bitterness that infects your own? As regards myself, you wish to
arouse a feeling of deep dislike against a man of honor--my father’s
friend and my own; and as for the count you wish him to love one who
is destined for your master. Really, monsieur, I should regard you as
a coward, and a traitor too, if I did not, with greater justice, regard
you as a madman.”

“Monsieur,” exclaimed De Wardes, exasperated, “I was deceived, I find,
in terming you a pedagogue. The tone you assume, and the style which
is peculiarly your own, is that of a Jesuit, and not of a gentleman.
Discontinue, I beg, whenever I am present, this style I complain of, and
the tone also. I hate M. d’Artagnan, because he was guilty of a cowardly
act towards my father.”

“You lie, monsieur,” said Raoul, coolly.

“You give me the lie, monsieur?” exclaimed De Wardes.

“Why not, if what you assert is untrue?”

“You give me the lie, and will not draw your sword?”

“I have resolved, monsieur, not to kill you until Madame shall have been
delivered safely into her husband’s hands.”

“Kill me! Believe me, monsieur, your schoolmaster’s rod does not kill so
easily.”

“No,” replied Raoul, sternly, “but M. d’Artagnan’s sword kills; and, not
only do I possess his sword, but he has himself taught me how to use it;
and with that sword, when a befitting time arrives, I will avenge his
name--a name you have dishonored.”

“Take care, monsieur,” exclaimed De Wardes; “if you do not immediately
give me satisfaction, I will avail myself of every means to revenge
myself.”

“Indeed, monsieur,” said Buckingham, suddenly, appearing upon the
scene of action, “that is a threat which savors of assassination, and
therefore, ill becomes a gentleman.”

“What did you say, my lord?” said De Wardes, turning round towards him.

“I said, monsieur, that the words you have just spoken are displeasing
to my English ears.”

“Very well, monsieur, if what you say is true,” exclaimed De Wardes,
thoroughly incensed, “I at least find in you one who will not escape me.
Understand my words as you like.”

“I take them in the manner they cannot but be understood,” replied
Buckingham, with that haughty tone which characterized him, and which,
even in ordinary conversation, gave a tone of defiance to everything he
said; “M. de Bragelonne is my friend, you insult M. de Bragelonne, and
you shall give me satisfaction for that insult.”

De Wardes cast a look upon De Bragelonne, who, faithful to the character
he had assumed, remained calm and unmoved, even after the duke’s
defiance.

“It would seem that I did not insult M. de Bragelonne, since M. de
Bragelonne, who carries a sword by his side, does not consider himself
insulted.”

“At all events you insult someone.”

“Yes, I insulted M. d’Artagnan,” resumed De Wardes, who had observed
that this was the only means of stinging Raoul, so as to awaken his
anger.

“That, then,” said Buckingham, “is another matter.”

“Precisely so,” said De Wardes; “it is the province of M. d’Artagnan’s
friends to defend him.”

“I am entirely of your opinion,” replied the duke, who had regained all
his indifference of manner; “if M. de Bragelonne were offended, I could
not reasonably be expected to espouse his quarrel, since he is himself
here; but when you say that it is a quarrel of M. d’Artagnan--”

“You will of course leave me to deal with the matter,” said De Wardes.

“Nay, on the contrary, for I draw my sword,” said Buckingham,
unsheathing it as he spoke; “for if M. d’Artagnan injured your father,
he rendered, or at least did all that he could to render, a great
service to mine.”

De Wardes was thunderstruck.

“M. d’Artagnan,” continued Buckingham, “is the bravest gentleman I know.
I shall be delighted, as I owe him many personal obligations, to settle
them with you, by crossing my sword with yours.” At the same moment
Buckingham drew his sword from its scabbard, saluted Raoul, and put
himself on guard.

De Wardes advanced a step to meet him.

“Stay, gentlemen,” said Raoul, advancing towards them, and placing his
own drawn sword between the combatants, “the affair is hardly worth the
trouble of blood being shed almost in the presence of the princess.
M. de Wardes speaks ill of M. d’Artagnan, with whom he is not even
acquainted.”

“What, monsieur,” said De Wardes, setting his teeth hard together, and
resting the point of his sword on the toe of his boot, “do you assert
that I do not know M. d’Artagnan?”

“Certainly not; you do not know him,” replied Raoul, coldly, “and you
are even not aware where he is to be found.”

“Not know where he is?”

“Such must be the case, since you fix your quarrel with him upon
strangers, instead of seeking M. d’Artagnan where he is to be found.” De
Wardes turned pale. “Well, monsieur,” continued Raoul, “I will tell you
where M. d’Artagnan is: he is now in Paris; when on duty he is to be
met with at the Louvre,--when not on duty, in the Rue des Lombards.
M. d’Artagnan can easily be discovered at either of those two places.
Having, therefore, as you assert, so many causes of complaint against
him, show your courage in seeking him out, and afford him an opportunity
of giving you that satisfaction you seem to ask of every one but of
himself.” De Wardes passed his hand across his forehead, which was
covered with perspiration. “For shame, M. de Wardes! so quarrelsome
a disposition is hardly becoming after the publication of the edicts
against duels. Pray think of that; the king will be incensed at our
disobedience, particularly at such a time,--and his majesty will be in
the right.”

“Excuses,” murmured De Wardes; “mere pretexts.”

“Really, M. De Wardes,” resumed Raoul, “such remarks are the idlest
bluster. You know very well that the Duke of Buckingham is a man of
undoubted courage, who has already fought ten duels, and will probably
fight eleven. His name alone is significant enough. As far as I am
concerned, you are well aware that I can fight also. I fought at Lens,
at Bleneau, at the Dunes in front of the artillery, a hundred paces in
front of the line, while you--I say this parenthetically--were a hundred
paces behind it. True it is, that on that occasion there was far too
great a concourse of persons present for your courage to be observed,
and on that account perhaps you did not reveal it; while here, it would
be a display, and would excite remark--you wish that others should talk
about you, in what manner you do not care. Do not depend upon me, M. de
Wardes to assist you in your designs, for I shall certainly not afford
you that pleasure.”

“Sensibly observed,” said Buckingham, putting up his sword, “and I ask
your forgiveness, M. de Bragelonne, for having allowed myself to yield
to a first impulse.”

De Wardes, however, on the contrary, perfectly furious, bounded forward
and raised his sword, threateningly, against Raoul, who had scarcely
enough time to put himself in a posture of defense.

“Take care, monsieur,” said Bragelonne, tranquilly, “or you will put out
one of my eyes.”

“You will not fight, then?” said De Wardes.

“Not at this moment; but this I promise to do; immediately on our
arrival at Paris I will conduct you to M. d’Artagnan, to whom you shall
detail all the causes of complaint you have against him. M d’Artagnan
will solicit the king’s permission to measure swords with you. The
king will yield his consent, and when you shall have received the
sword-thrust in due course, you will consider, in a calmer frame
of mind, the precepts of the Gospel, which enjoin forgetfulness of
injuries.”

“Ah!” exclaimed De Wardes, furious at this imperturbable coolness, “one
can clearly see you are half a bastard, M. de Bragelonne.”

Raoul became as pale as death; his eyes flashed lightning, causing De
Wardes involuntarily to fall back. Buckingham, also, who had perceived
their expression, threw himself between the two adversaries, whom he
had expected to see precipitate themselves on each other. De Wardes had
reserved this injury for the last; he clasped his sword firmly in his
hand, and awaited the encounter. “You are right, monsieur,” said Raoul,
mastering his emotion, “I am only acquainted with my father’s name; but
I know too well that the Comte de la Fere is too upright and honorable
a man to allow me to fear for a single moment that there is, as you
insinuate, any stain upon my birth. My ignorance, therefore, of my
mother’s name is a misfortune for me, and not a reproach. You are
deficient in loyalty of conduct; you are wanting in courtesy, in
reproaching me with misfortune. It matters little, however, the insult
has been given, and I consider myself insulted accordingly. It is quite
understood, then, that after you shall have received satisfaction from
M. d’Artagnan, you will settle your quarrel with me.”

“I admire your prudence, monsieur,” replied De Wardes with a bitter
smile; “a little while ago you promised me a sword-thrust from M.
d’Artagnan, and now, after I shall have received his, you offer me one
from yourself.”

“Do not disturb yourself,” replied Raoul, with concentrated anger; “in
all affairs of that nature, M. d’Artagnan is exceedingly skillful, and
I will beg him as a favor to treat you as he did your father; in other
words, to spare your life at least, so as to leave me the pleasure,
after your recovery, of killing you outright; for you have the heart of
a viper, M. de Wardes, and in very truth, too many precautions cannot be
taken against you.”

“I shall take my precautions against you,” said De Wardes, “be assured
of it.”

“Allow me, monsieur,” said Buckingham, “to translate your remark by a
piece of advice I am about to give M. de Bragelonne; M. de Bragelonne,
wear a cuirass.”

De Wardes clenched his hands. “Ah!” said he, “you two gentlemen intend
to wait until you have taken that precaution before you measure your
swords against mine.”

“Very well, monsieur,” said Raoul, “since you positively will have it
so, let us settle the affair now.” And, drawing his sword, he advanced
towards De Wardes.

“What are you going to do?” said Buckingham.

“Be easy,” said Raoul, “it will not be very long.”

De Wardes placed himself on his guard; their swords crossed. De Wardes
flew upon Raoul with such impetuosity, that at the first clashing of the
steel blades Buckingham clearly saw that Raoul was only trifling with
his adversary. Buckingham stepped aside, and watched the combat. Raoul
was as calm as if he were handling a foil instead of a sword; having
retreated a step, he parried three or four fierce thrusts which De
Wardes made at him, caught the sword of the latter with within his own,
and sent it flying twenty paces the other side of the barrier. Then as
De Wardes stood disarmed and astounded at his defeat, Raoul sheathed
his sword, seized him by the collar and the waist band, and hurled his
adversary to the other end of the barrier, trembling, and mad with rage.

“We shall meet again,” murmured De Wardes, rising from the ground and
picking up his sword.

“I have done nothing for the last hour,” said Raoul, rising from the
ground, “but say the same thing.” Then, turning towards the duke, he
said, “I entreat you to be silent about this affair; I am ashamed
to have gone so far, but my anger carried me away, and I ask your
forgiveness for it;--forget it, too.”

“Dear viscount,” said the duke, pressing with his own the vigorous and
valiant hand of his companion, “allow me, on the contrary, to remember
it, and to look after your safety; that man is dangerous,--he will kill
you.”

“My father,” replied Raoul, “lived for twenty years under the menace of
a much more formidable enemy, and he still lives.”

“Your father had good friends, viscount.”

“Yes,” sighed Raoul, “such friends, indeed, that none are now left like
them.”

“Do not say that, I beg, at the very moment I offer you my friendship;”
 and Buckingham opened his arms to embrace Raoul, who delightedly
received the proffered alliance. “In my family,” added Buckingham, “you
are aware, M. de Bragelonne, we die to save our friends.”

“I know it well, duke,” replied Raoul.



Chapter XIII. An Account of what the Chevalier de Lorraine Thought of
Madame.

Nothing further interrupted the journey. Under a pretext that was little
remarked, M. de Wardes went forward in advance of the others. He took
Manicamp with him, for his equable and dreamy disposition acted as a
counterpoise to his own. It is a subject of remark, that quarrelsome
and restless characters invariably seek the companionship of gentle,
timorous dispositions, as if the former sought, in the contrast, a
repose for their own ill-humor, and the latter a protection for their
weakness. Buckingham and Bragelonne, admitting De Guiche into their
friendship, in concert with him, sang the praises of the princess during
the whole of the journey. Bragelonne, had, however, insisted that their
three voices should be in concert, instead of singing in solo parts,
as De Guiche and his rival seemed to have acquired a dangerous habit of
doing. This style of harmony pleased the queen-mother exceedingly,
but it was not perhaps so agreeable to the young princess, who was an
incarnation of coquetry, and who, without any fear as far as her
own voice was concerned, sought opportunities of so perilously
distinguishing herself. She possessed one of those fearless and
incautious dispositions that find gratification in an excess of
sensitiveness of feeling, and for whom, also, danger has a certain
fascination. And so her glances, her smiles, her toilette, an
inexhaustible armory of weapons of offense, were showered on the three
young men with overwhelming force; and, from her well-stored arsenal
issued glances, kindly recognitions, and a thousand other little
charming attentions which were intended to strike at long range the
gentlemen who formed the escort, the townspeople, the officers of the
different cities she passed through, pages, populace, and servants;
it was wholesale slaughter, a general devastation. By the time Madame
arrived at Paris, she had reduced to slavery about a hundred thousand
lovers: and brought in her train to Paris half a dozen men who were
almost mad about her, and two who were, indeed, literally out of their
minds. Raoul was the only person who divined the power of this woman’s
attraction, and as his heart was already engaged, he arrived in the
capital full of indifference and distrust. Occasionally during the
journey he conversed with the queen of England respecting the power
of fascination which Madame possessed, and the mother, whom so many
misfortunes and deceptions had taught experience, replied: “Henrietta
was sure to be illustrious in one way or another, whether born in a
palace or born in obscurity; for she is a woman of great imagination,
capricious and self-willed.” De Wardes and Manicamp, in their
self-assumed character of courtiers, had announced the princess’s
arrival. The procession was met at Nanterre by a brilliant escort
of cavaliers and carriages. It was Monsieur himself, followed by the
Chevalier de Lorraine and by his favorites, the latter being themselves
followed by a portion of the king’s military household, who had arrived
to meet his affianced bride. At St. Germain, the princess and her mother
had changed their heavy traveling carriage, somewhat impaired by the
journey, for a light, richly decorated chariot drawn by six horses with
white and gold harness. Seated in this open carriage, as though upon
a throne, and beneath a parasol of embroidered silk, fringed with
feathers, sat the young and lovely princess, on whose beaming face were
reflected the softened rose-tints which suited her delicate skin to
perfection. Monsieur, on reaching the carriage, was struck by her
beauty; he showed his admiration in so marked a manner that the
Chevalier de Lorraine shrugged his shoulders as he listened to his
compliments, while Buckingham and De Guiche were almost heart-broken.
After the usual courtesies had been rendered, and the ceremony
completed, the procession slowly resumed the road to Paris. The
presentations had been carelessly made, and Buckingham, with the rest of
the English gentlemen, had been introduced to Monsieur, from whom they
had received but very indifferent attention. But, during their progress,
as he observed that the duke devoted himself with his accustomed
eagerness to the carriage-door, he asked the Chevalier de Lorraine, his
inseparable companion, “Who is that cavalier?”

“He was presented to your highness a short while ago; it is the handsome
Duke of Buckingham.”

“Ah, yes, I remember.”

“Madame’s knight,” added the favorite, with an inflection of the voice
which envious minds can alone give to the simplest phrases.

“What do you say?” replied the prince.

“I said ‘Madame’s knight’.”

“Has she a recognized knight, then?”

“One would think you can judge of that for yourself; look, only, how
they are laughing and flirting. All three of them.”

“What do you mean by _all three?_”

“Do you not see that De Guiche is one of the party?”

“Yes, I see. But what does that prove?”

“That Madame has two admirers instead of one.”

“You poison the simplest thing!”

“I poison nothing. Ah! your royal highness’s mind is perverted. The
honors of the kingdom of France are being paid to your wife and you are
not satisfied.”

The Duke of Orleans dreaded the satirical humor of the Chevalier de
Lorraine whenever it reached a certain degree of bitterness, and he
changed the conversation abruptly. “The princess is pretty,” said he,
very negligently, as if he were speaking of a stranger.

“Yes,” replied the chevalier, in the same tone.

“You say ‘yes’ like a ‘no’. She has very beautiful black eyes.”

“Yes, but small.”

“That is so, but they are brilliant. She is tall, and of a good figure.”

“I fancy she stoops a little, my lord.”

“I do not deny it. She has a noble appearance.”

“Yes, but her face is thin.”

“I thought her teeth beautiful.”

“They can easily be seen, for her mouth is large enough. Decidedly, I
was wrong, my lord; you are certainly handsomer than your wife.”

“But do you think me as handsome as Buckingham?”

“Certainly, and he thinks so, too; for look, my lord, he is redoubling
his attentions to Madame to prevent your effacing the impression he has
made.”

Monsieur made a movement of impatience, but as he noticed a smile of
triumph pass across the chevalier’s lips, he drew up his horse to a
foot-pace. “Why,” said he, “should I occupy myself any longer about my
cousin? Do I not already know her? Were we not brought up together? Did
I not see her at the Louvre when she was quite a child?”

“A great change has taken place in her since then, prince. At the period
you allude to, she was somewhat less brilliant, and scarcely so proud,
either. One evening, particularly, you may remember, my lord, the
king refused to dance with her, because he thought her plain and badly
dressed!”

These words made the Duke of Orleans frown. It was by no means
flattering for him to marry a princess of whom, when young, the king had
not thought much. He would probably have retorted, but at this moment
De Guiche quitted the carriage to join the prince. He had remarked the
prince and the chevalier together, and full of anxious attention he
seemed to try and guess the nature of the remarks which they had just
exchanged. The chevalier, whether he had some treacherous object in
view, or from imprudence, did not take the trouble to dissimulate.
“Count,” he said, “you’re a man of excellent taste.”

“Thank you for the compliment,” replied De Guiche; “but why do you say
that?”

“Well I appeal to his highness.”

“No doubt of it,” said Monsieur; “and Guiche knows perfectly well that I
regard him as a most finished cavalier.”

“Well, since that is decided, I resume. You have been in the princess’s
society, count, for the last eight days, have you not?”

“Yes,” replied De Guiche, coloring in spite of himself.

“Well then, tell us frankly, what do you think of her personal
appearance?”

“Of her personal appearance?” returned De Guiche, stupefied.

“Yes; of her appearance, of her mind, of herself, in fact.”

Astounded by this question, De Guiche hesitated answering.

“Come, come, De Guiche,” resumed the chevalier, laughingly, “tell us
your opinion frankly; the prince commands it.”

“Yes, yes,” said the prince, “be frank.”

De Guiche stammered out a few unintelligible words.

“I am perfectly well aware,” returned Monsieur, “that the subject is a
delicate one, but you know you can tell me everything. What do you think
of her?”

In order to avoid betraying his real thoughts, De Guiche had recourse
to the only defense which a man taken by surprise really has, and
accordingly told an untruth. “I do not find Madame,” he said, “either
good or bad looking, yet rather good than bad looking.”

“What! count,” exclaimed the chevalier, “you who went into such
ecstasies and uttered so many exclamations at the sight of her
portrait.”

De Guiche colored violently. Very fortunately, his horse, which
was slightly restive, enabled him by a sudden plunge to conceal his
agitation. “What portrait?” he murmured, joining them again. The
chevalier had not taken his eyes off him.

“Yes, the portrait. Was not the miniature a good likeness?”

“I do not remember. I had forgotten the portrait; it quite escaped my
recollection.”

“And yet it made a very marked impression upon you,” said the chevalier.

“That is not unlikely.”

“Is she witty, at all events?” inquired the duke.

“I believe so, my lord.”

“Is M. de Buckingham witty, too?” said the chevalier.

“I do not know.”

“My own opinion is that he must be,” replied the chevalier, “for he
makes Madame laugh, and she seems to take no little pleasure in his
society, which never happens to a clever woman when in the company of a
simpleton.”

“Of course, then, he must be clever,” said De Guiche, simply.

At this moment Raoul opportunely arrived, seeing how De Guiche was
pressed by his dangerous questioner, to whom he addressed a remark, and
in that way changed the conversation. The _entree_ was brilliant and
joyous.

The king, in honor of his brother, had directed that the festivities
should be on a scale of the greatest possible magnificence. Madame and
her mother alighted at the Louvre, where, during their exile they had
so gloomily submitted to obscurity, misery, and privations of every
description. That palace, which had been so inhospitable a residence
for the unhappy daughter of Henry IV., the naked walls, the uneven
floorings, the ceilings matted with cobwebs, the vast dilapidated
chimney-places, the cold hearths on which the charity extended to them
by parliament hardly permitted a fire to glow, was completely altered
in appearance. The richest hangings and the thickest carpets, glistening
flagstones, and pictures, with their richly gilded frames; in every
direction could be seen candelabra, mirrors, and furniture and fittings
of the most sumptuous character; in every direction, also, were guards
of the proudest military bearing, with floating plumes, crowds of
attendants and courtiers in the ante-chambers and upon the staircases.
In the courtyards, where the grass had formerly been allowed to
luxuriate, as if the ungrateful Mazarin had thought it a good idea to
let the Parisians perceive the solitude and disorder were, with misery
and despair, the fit accompaniments of fallen monarchy; the immense
courtyards, formerly silent and desolate, were now thronged with
courtiers whose horses were pacing and prancing to and fro. The
carriages were filled with young and beautiful women, who awaited the
opportunity of saluting, as she passed, the daughter of that daughter of
France who, during her widowhood and exile, had sometimes gone without
wood for her fire, and bread for her table, whom the meanest attendant
at the chateau had treated with indifference and contempt. And so, the
Madame Henriette once more returned to the Louvre, with her heart more
swollen with bitter recollections than her daughter’s, whose disposition
was fickle and forgetful, with triumph and delight. She knew but too
well this brilliant reception was paid to the happy mother of a king
restored to his throne, a throne second to none in Europe, while the
worse than indifferent reception she had before met with was paid
to her, the daughter of Henry IV., as a punishment for having been
unfortunate. After the princess had been installed in their apartments
and had rested, the gentlemen who had formed their escort, having, in
like manner, recovered from their fatigue, they resumed their accustomed
habits and occupations. Raoul began by setting off to see his father,
who had left for Blois. He then tried to see M. d’Artagnan, who,
however, being engaged in the organization of a military household for
the king, could not be found anywhere. Bragelonne next sought out De
Guiche, but the count was occupied in a long conference with his tailors
and with Manicamp, which consumed his whole time. With the Duke of
Buckingham he fared still worse, for the duke was purchasing horses
after horses, diamonds upon diamonds. He monopolized every embroiderer,
jeweler, and tailor that Paris could boast of. Between De Guiche and
himself a vigorous contest ensued, invariably a courteous one, in which,
in order to insure success, the duke was ready to spend a million; while
the Marechal de Gramont had only allowed his son sixty thousand francs.
So Buckingham laughed and spent his money. Guiche groaned in despair,
and would have shown it more violently, had it not been for the advice
De Bragelonne gave him.

“A million!” repeated De Guiche daily; “I must submit. Why will not the
marechal advance me a portion of my patrimony?”

“Because you would throw it away,” said Raoul.

“What can that matter to him? If I am to die of it, I shall die of it,
and then I shall need nothing further.”

“But what need is there to die?” said Raoul.

“I do not wish to be conquered in elegance by an Englishman.”

“My dear count,” said Manicamp, “elegance is not a costly commodity, it
is only a very difficult accomplishment.”

“Yes, but difficult things cost a good deal of money, and I have only
got sixty thousand francs.”

“A very embarrassing state of things, truly,” said De Wardes; “even if
you spent as much as Buckingham, there is only nine hundred and forty
thousand francs difference.”

“Where am I to find them?”

“Get into debt.”

“I am in debt already.”

“A greater reason for getting further.”

Advice like this resulted in De Guiche becoming excited to such an
extent that he committed extravagances where Buckingham only incurred
expenses. The rumor of this extravagant profuseness delighted the
hearts of all the shopkeepers in Paris; from the hotel of the Duke of
Buckingham to that of the Comte de Gramont nothing but miracles was
attempted. While all this was going on, Madame was resting herself, and
Bragelonne was engaged in writing to Mademoiselle de la Valliere. He had
already dispatched four letters, and not an answer to any one of them
had been received, when, on the very morning fixed for the marriage
ceremony, which was to take place in the chapel at the Palais Royal,
Raoul, who was dressing, heard his valet announce M. de Malicorne. “What
can this Malicorne want with me?” thought Raoul; and then said to his
valet, “Let him wait.”

“It is a gentleman from Blois,” said the valet.

“Admit him at once,” said Raoul, eagerly.

Malicorne entered as brilliant as a star, and wearing a superb sword at
his side. After having saluted Raoul most gracefully, he said: “M. de
Bragelonne, I am the bearer of a thousand compliments from a lady to
you.”

Raoul colored. “From a lady,” said he, “from a lady of Blois?”

“Yes, monsieur; from Mademoiselle de Montalais.”

“Thank you, monsieur; I recollect you now,” said Raoul. “And what does
Mademoiselle de Montalais require of me.”

Malicorne drew four letters from his pocket, which he offered to Raoul.

“My own letters, is it possible?” he said, turning pale; “my letters,
and the seals unbroken?”

“Monsieur, your letters did not find at Blois the person to whom they
were addressed, and so they are now returned to you.”

“Mademoiselle de la Valliere has left Blois, then?” exclaimed Raoul.

“Eight days ago.”

“Where is she, then?”

“In Paris.”

“How is it known that these letters were from me?”

“Mademoiselle de Montalais recognized your handwriting and your seal,”
 said Malicorne.

Raoul colored and smiled. “Mademoiselle de Montalais is exceedingly
amiable,” he said; “she is always kind and charming.”

“Always, monsieur.”

“Surely she could have given me some precise information about
Mademoiselle de la Valliere. I never could find her in this immense
city.”

Malicorne drew another packet from his pocket. “You may possibly find in
this letter what you are anxious to learn.”

Raoul hurriedly broke the seal. The writing was that of Mademoiselle
Aure, and inclosed were these words:--“Paris, Palais Royal. The day of
the nuptial blessing.”

“What does this mean?” inquired Raoul of Malicorne; “you probably know?”

“I do, monsieur.”

“For pity’s sake, tell me, then.”

“Impossible, monsieur.”

“Why so?”

“Because Mademoiselle Aure has forbidden me to do so.”

Raoul looked at his strange visitor, and remained silent;--“At least,
tell me whether it is fortunate or unfortunate.”

“That you will see.”

“You are very severe in your reservations.”

“Will you grant me one favor, monsieur?” said Malicorne.

“In exchange for that you refuse me?”

“Precisely.”

“What is it?”

“I have the greatest desire to see the ceremony, and I have no ticket
to admit me, in spite of all the steps I have taken to secure one. Could
you get me admitted?”

“Certainly.”

“Do me this kindness, then, I entreat.”

“Most willingly, monsieur; come with me.”

“I am exceedingly indebted to you, monsieur,” said Malicorne.

“I thought you were a friend of M. de Manicamp.”

“I am, monsieur; but this morning I was with him as he was dressing, and
I let a bottle of blacking fall over his new dress, and he flew at me
sword in hand, so that I was obliged to make my escape. That is the
reason I could not ask him for a ticket. He wanted to kill me.”

“I can well believe it,” laughed Raoul. “I know Manicamp is capable of
killing a man who has been unfortunate enough to commit the crime you
have to reproach yourself with, but I will repair the mischief as far as
you are concerned. I will but fasten my cloak, and shall then be ready
to serve you, not only as a guide, but as your introducer, too.”



Chapter XIV. A Surprise for Raoul.

Madame’s marriage was celebrated in the chapel of the Palais Royal, in
the presence of a crowd of courtiers, who had been most scrupulously
selected. However, notwithstanding the marked favor which an invitation
indicated, Raoul, faithful to his promise to Malicorne, who was so
anxious to witness the ceremony, obtained admission for him. After he
had fulfilled this engagement, Raoul approached De Guiche, who, as if
in contrast with his magnificent costume, exhibited a countenance so
utterly dejected, that the Duke of Buckingham was the only one present
who could contend with him as far as pallor and discomfiture were
concerned.

“Take care, count,” said Raoul, approaching his friend, and preparing to
support him at the moment the archbishop blessed the married couple. In
fact, the Prince of Conde was attentively scrutinizing these two images
of desolation, standing like caryatides on either side of the nave
of the church. The count, after that, kept a more careful watch over
himself.

At the termination of the ceremony, the king and queen passed onward
towards the grand reception-room, where Madame and her suite were to be
presented to them. It was remarked that the king, who had seemed more
than surprised at his sister-in-law’s appearance, was most flattering
in his compliments to her. Again, it was remarked that the queen-mother,
fixing a long and thoughtful gaze upon Buckingham, leaned towards
Madame de Motteville as though to ask her, “Do you not see how much he
resembles his father?” and finally it was remarked that Monsieur watched
everybody, and seemed quite discontented. After the reception of the
princess and ambassadors, Monsieur solicited the king’s permission to
present to him as well as to Madame the persons belonging to their new
household.

“Are you aware, vicomte,” inquired the Prince de Conde of Raoul,
“whether the household has been selected by a person of taste, and
whether there are any faces worth looking at?”

“I have not the slightest idea, monseigneur,” replied Raoul.

“You affect ignorance, surely.”

“In what way, monseigneur?”

“You are a friend of De Guiche, who is one of the friends of the
prince.”

“That may be so, monseigneur; but the matter having no interest whatever
for me, I have never questioned De Guiche on the subject; and De Guiche,
on his part, never having been questioned, did not communicate any
particulars to me.”

“But Manicamp?”

“It is true I saw Manicamp at Le Havre, and during the journey here, but
I was no more inquisitive with him than I had been towards De Guiche.
Besides, is it likely that Manicamp should know anything of such
matters? for he is a person of only secondary importance.”

“My dear vicomte, do you not know better than that?” said the prince;
“why, it is these persons of secondary importance, who, on such
occasions, have all the influence; and the truth is, that nearly
everything has been done through Manicamp’s presentations to De Guiche,
and through De Guiche to Monsieur.”

“I assure you, monseigneur, I was ignorant of that,” said Raoul, “and
what your highness does me the honor to impart is perfectly new to me.”

“I will most readily believe you, although it seems incredible; besides
we shall not have long to wait. See, the flying squadron is advancing,
as good Queen Catherine used to say. Ah! ah! what pretty faces!”

A bevy of young girls at this moment entered the _salon_, conducted by
Madame de Navailles, and to Manicamp’s credit be it said, if indeed
he had taken that part in their selection which the Prince de Conde
assigned him, it was a display calculated to dazzle those who, like the
prince, could appreciate every character and style of beauty. A young,
fair-complexioned girl, from twenty to one-and-twenty years of age, and
whose large blue eyes flashed, as she opened them, in the most dazzling
manner, walked at the head of the band and was the first presented.

“Mademoiselle de Tonnay-Charente,” said Madame de Navailles to Monsieur,
who, as he saluted his wife, repeated “Mademoiselle de Tonnay-Charente.”

“Ah! ah!” said the Prince de Conde to Raoul, “she is presentable
enough.”

“Yes,” said Raoul, “but has she not a somewhat haughty style?”

“Bah! we know these airs very well, vicomte; three months hence she will
be tame enough. But look, there, indeed, is a pretty face.”

“Yes,” said Raoul, “and one I am acquainted with.”

“Mademoiselle Aure de Montalais,” said Madame de Navailles. The name and
Christian name were carefully repeated by Monsieur.

“Great heavens!” exclaimed Raoul, fixing his bewildered gaze upon the
entrance doorway.

“What’s the matter?” inquired the prince; “was it Mademoiselle Aure de
Montalais who made you utter such a ‘Great heavens’?”

“No, monseigneur, no,” replied Raoul, pale and trembling.

“Well, then, if it be not Mademoiselle Aure de Montalais, it is that
pretty _blonde_ who follows her. What beautiful eyes! She is rather
thin, but has fascinations without number.”

“Mademoiselle de la Baume le Blanc de la Valliere!” said Madame de
Navailles; and, as this name resounded through his whole being, a cloud
seemed to rise from his breast to his eyes, so that he neither saw nor
heard anything more; and the prince, finding him nothing more than a
mere echo which remained silent under his railleries, moved forward to
inspect somewhat closer the beautiful girls whom his first glance had
already particularized.

“Louise here! Louise a maid of honor to Madame!” murmured Raoul, and his
eyes, which did not suffice to satisfy his reason, wandered from Louise
to Montalais. The latter had already emancipated herself from her
assumed timidity, which she only needed for the presentation and for her
reverences.

Mademoiselle de Montalais, from the corner of the room to which she had
retired, was looking with no slight confidence at the different persons
present; and, having discovered Raoul, she amused herself with the
profound astonishment which her own and her friend’s presence there
caused the unhappy lover. Her waggish and malicious look, which Raoul
tried to avoid meeting, and which yet he sought inquiringly from time
to time, placed him on the rack. As for Louise, whether from natural
timidity, or some other reason for which Raoul could not account, she
kept her eyes constantly cast down; intimidated, dazzled, and with
impeded respiration, she withdrew herself as much as possible aside,
unaffected even by the nudges Montalais gave her with her elbow. The
whole scene was a perfect enigma for Raoul, the key to which he would
have given anything to obtain. But no one was there who could assist
him, not even Malicorne; who, a little uneasy at finding himself in the
presence of so many persons of good birth, and not a little discouraged
by Montalais’s bantering glances, had described a circle, and by degrees
succeeded in getting a few paces from the prince, behind the group of
maids of honor, and nearly within reach of Mademoiselle Aure’s voice,
she being the planet around which he, as her attendant satellite, seemed
constrained to gravitate. As he recovered his self-possession, Raoul
fancied he recognized voices on his right hand side that were familiar
to him, and he perceived De Wardes, De Guiche, and the Chevalier de
Lorraine conversing together. It is true they were talking in tones so
low, that the sound of their words could hardly be heard in the vast
apartment. To speak in that manner from any particular place without
bending down, or turning round, or looking at the person with whom one
may be engaged in conversation, is a talent that cannot be immediately
acquired by newcomers. Long study is needed for such conversations,
which, without a look, gesture, or movement of the head, seem like the
conversation of a group of statues. In fact, the king’s and queen’s
grand assemblies, while their majesties were speaking, and while every
one present seemed to be listening in the midst of the most profound
silence, some of these noiseless conversations took place, in which
adulation was not the prevailing feature. But Raoul was one among others
exceedingly clever in this art, so much a matter of etiquette, that from
the movement of the lips, he was often able to guess the sense of the
words.

“Who is that Montalais?” inquired De Wardes, “and that La Valliere? What
country-town have we had sent here?”

“Montalais?” said the chevalier,--“oh, I know her; she is a good sort of
girl, whom we shall find amusing enough. La Valliere is a charming girl,
slightly lame.”

“Ah! bah!” said De Wardes.

“Do not be absurd, De Wardes, there are some very characteristic and
ingenious Latin axioms about lame ladies.”

“Gentlemen, gentlemen,” said De Guiche, looking at Raoul with
uneasiness, “be a little careful, I entreat you.”

But the uneasiness of the count, in appearance at least, was not needed.
Raoul had preserved the firmest and most indifferent countenance,
although he had not lost a word that passed. He seemed to keep an
account of the insolence and license of the two speakers in order to
settle matters with them at the earliest opportunity.

De Wardes seemed to guess what was passing in his mind, and continued:

“Who are these young ladies’ lovers?”

“Montalais’s lover?” said the chevalier.

“Yes, Montalais first.”

“You, I, or De Guiche,--whoever likes, in fact.”

“And the other?”

“Mademoiselle de la Valliere?”

“Yes.”

“Take care, gentlemen,” exclaimed De Guiche, anxious to put a stop to
the chevalier’s reply; “take care, Madame is listening to us.”

Raoul had thrust his hand up to the wrist into his _justaucorps_ in
great agitation. But the very malignity which he saw was excited against
these poor girls made him take a serious resolution. “Poor Louise,” he
thought, “has come here only with an honorable object in view, and under
honorable protection; and I must learn what that object is which she
has in view, and who it is that protects her.” And following Malicorne’s
maneuver, he made his way toward the group of the maids of honor. The
presentations were soon over. The king, who had done nothing but look
at and admire Madame, shortly afterwards left the reception-room,
accompanied by the two queens. The Chevalier de Lorraine resumed his
place beside Monsieur, and, as he accompanied him, insinuated a few
drops of the venom he had collected during the last hour, while looking
at some of the faces in the court, and suspecting that some of their
hearts might be happy. A few of the persons present followed the king
as he quitted the apartment; but such of the courtiers as assumed an
independence of character, and professed a gallantry of disposition,
began to approach the ladies of the court. The prince paid his
compliments to Mademoiselle de Tonnay-Charente, Buckingham devoted
himself to Madame Chalais and Mademoiselle de Lafayette, whom Madame
already distinguished by her notice, and whom she held in high regard.
As for the Comte de Guiche, who had abandoned Monsieur as soon as he
could approach Madame alone, he conversed, with great animation, with
Madame de Valentinois, and with Mademoiselle de Crequy and de Chatillon.

Amid these varied political, and amorous interests, Malicorne was
anxious to gain Montalais’s attention; but the latter preferred talking
with Raoul, even if it were only to amuse herself with his innumerable
questions and his astonishment. Raoul had gone directly to Mademoiselle
de la Valliere, and had saluted her with the profoundest respect, at
which Louise blushed, and could not say a word. Montalais, however,
hurried to her assistance.

“Well, monsieur le vicomte, here we are, you see.”

“I do, indeed, see you,” said Raoul smiling, “and it is exactly because
you are here that I wish to ask for some explanation.”

Malicorne approached the group with his most fascinating smile.

“Go away, Malicorne; really you are exceedingly indiscreet.” At this
remark Malicorne bit his lips and retired a few steps, without making
any reply. His smile, however, changed its expression, and from its
former frankness, became mocking in its expression.

“You wished for an explanation, M. Raoul?” inquired Montalais.

“It is surely worth one, I think; Mademoiselle de la Valliere is a maid
of honor to Madame!”

“Why should she not be a maid of honor, as well as myself?” inquired
Montalais.

“Pray accept my compliments, young ladies,” said Raoul, who fancied he
perceived they were not disposed to answer him in a direct manner.

“Your remark was not made in a very complimentary manner, vicomte.”

“Mine?”

“Certainly; I appeal to Louise.”

“M. de Bragelonne probably thinks the position is above my condition,”
 said Louise, hesitatingly.

“Assuredly not,” replied Raoul, eagerly, “you know very well that such
is not my feeling; were you called upon to occupy a queen’s throne, I
should not be surprised; how much greater reason, then, such a position
as this? The only circumstance that amazes me is, that I should have
learned it only to-day, and that by the merest accident.”

“That is true,” replied Montalais, with her usual giddiness; “you know
nothing about it, and there is no reason you should. M. de Bragelonne
had written several letters to you, but your mother was the only person
who remained behind at Blois, and it was necessary to prevent these
letters from falling into her hands; I intercepted them, and returned
them to M. Raoul, so that he believed you were still at Blois while you
were here in Paris, and had no idea whatever, indeed, how high you had
risen in rank.”

“Did you not inform M. Raoul, as I begged you to do?”

“Why should I? to give him opportunity of making some of his severe
remarks and moral reflections, and to undo what we have had so much
trouble in effecting? Certainly not.”

“Am I so very severe, then?” said Raoul, inquiringly.

“Besides,” said Montalais, “it is sufficient to say that it suited me.
I was about setting off for Paris--you were away; Louise was weeping her
eyes out; interpret that as you please; I begged a friend, a protector
of mine, who had obtained the appointment for me, to solicit one for
Louise; the appointment arrived. Louise left in order to get her costume
prepared; as I had my own ready, I remained behind; I received your
letters, and returned them to you, adding a few words, promising you a
surprise. Your surprise is before you, monsieur, and seems to be a fair
one enough; you have nothing more to ask. Come, M. Malicorne, it is now
time to leave these young people together: they have many things to
talk about; give me your hand; I trust that you appreciate the honor
conferred upon you, M. Malicorne.”

“Forgive me,” said Raoul, arresting the giddy girl, and giving to
his voice an intonation, the gravity of which contrasted with that of
Montalais; “forgive me, but may I inquire the name of the protector you
speak of; for if protection be extended towards you, Mademoiselle de
Montalais,--for which, indeed, so many reasons exist,” added Raoul,
bowing, “I do not see that the same reasons exist why Mademoiselle de la
Valliere should be similarly cared for.”

“But, M. Raoul,” said Louise, innocently, “there is no difference in the
matter, and I do not see why I should not tell it you myself; it was M.
Malicorne who obtained it for me.”

Raoul remained for a moment almost stupefied, asking himself if they
were trifling with him; he then turned round to interrogate Malicorne,
but he had been hurried away by Montalais, and was already at some
distance from them. Mademoiselle de la Valliere attempted to follow her
friend, but Raoul, with gentle authority, detained her.

“Louise, one word, I beg.”

“But, M. Raoul,” said Louise, blushing, “we are alone. Every one has
left. They will become anxious, and will be looking for us.”

“Fear nothing,” said the young man, smiling, “we are neither of us of
sufficient importance for our absence to be remarked.”

“But I have my duty to perform, M. Raoul.”

“Do not be alarmed, I am acquainted with these usages of the court; you
will not be on duty until to-morrow; a few minutes are at your disposal,
which will enable you to give me the information I am about to have the
honor to ask you for.”

“How serious you are, M. Raoul!” said Louise.

“Because the circumstances are serious. Are you listening?”

“I am listening; I would only repeat, monsieur, that we are quite
alone.”

“You are right,” said Raoul, and, offering her his hand, he led the
young girl into the gallery adjoining the reception-room, the windows
of which looked out upon the courtyard. Every one hurried towards the
middle window, which had a balcony outside, from which all the details
of the slow and formal preparations for departure could be seen. Raoul
opened one of the side windows, and then, being alone with Louise, said
to her: “You know, Louise, that from my childhood I have regarded you
as my sister, as one who has been the confidante of all my troubles, to
whom I have entrusted all my hopes.”

“Yes, M. Raoul,” she answered softly; “yes, M. Raoul, I know that.”

“You used, on your side, to show the same friendship towards me, and had
the same confidence in me; why have you not, on this occasion, been my
friend,--why have you shown suspicion of me?”

Mademoiselle de la Valliere did not answer. “I fondly thought you loved
me,” said Raoul, whose voice became more and more agitated; “I fondly
thought you consented to all the plans we had, together, laid down for
our own happiness, at the time when we wandered up and down the walks of
Cour-Cheverny, under the avenue of poplar trees leading to Blois. You
do not answer me, Louise. Is it possible,” he inquired, breathing with
difficulty, “that you no longer love me?”

“I did not say so,” replied Louise, softly.

“Oh! tell me the truth, I implore you. All my hopes in life are centered
in you. I chose you for your gentle and simple tastes. Do not suffer
yourself to be dazzled, Louise, now that you are in the midst of a court
where all that is pure too soon becomes corrupt--where all that is young
too soon grows old. Louise, close your ears, so as not to hear what may
be said; shut your eyes, so as not to see the examples before you; shut
your lips, that you may not inhale the corrupting influences about
you. Without falsehood or subterfuge, Louise, am I to believe what
Mademoiselle de Montalais stated? Louise, did you come to Paris because
I was no longer at Blois?”

La Valliere blushed and concealed her face in her hands.

“Yes, it was so, then!” exclaimed Raoul, delightedly; “that was, then,
your reason for coming here. I love you as I never yet loved you.
Thanks, Louise, for this devotion; but measures must be taken to place
you beyond all insult, to shield you from every lure. Louise, a maid of
honor, in the court of a young princess in these days of free manners
and inconstant affections--a maid of honor is placed as an object of
attack without having any means of defence afforded her; this state of
things cannot continue; you must be married in order to be respected.”

“Married?”

“Yes, here is my hand, Louise; will you place yours within it?”

“But your father?”

“My father leaves me perfectly free.”

“Yet--”

“I understand your scruples, Louise; I will consult my father.”

“Reflect, M. Raoul; wait.”

“Wait! it is impossible. Reflect, Louise, when _you_ are concerned! it
would be insulting,--give me your hand, dear Louise; I am my own master.
My father will consent, I know; give me your hand, do not keep me
waiting thus. One word in answer, one word only; if not, I shall begin
to think that, in order to change you forever, nothing more was needed
than a single step in the palace, a single breath of favor, a smile from
the queen, a look from the king.”

Raoul had no sooner pronounced this latter word, than La Valliere became
as pale as death, no doubt from fear at seeing the young man excite
himself. With a movement as rapid as thought, she placed both her
hands in those of Raoul, and then fled, without adding a syllable;
disappearing without casting a look behind her. Raoul felt his whole
frame tremble at the contact of her hand; he received the compact as a
solemn bargain wrung by affection from her child-like timidity.



Chapter XV. The Consent of Athos.

Raoul quitted the Palais Royal full of ideas that admitted no delay in
execution. He mounted his horse in the courtyard, and followed the road
to Blois, while the marriage festivities of Monsieur and the princess of
England were being celebrated with exceeding animation by the courtiers,
but to the despair of De Guiche and Buckingham. Raoul lost no time
on the road, and in sixteen hours he arrived at Blois. As he traveled
along, he marshaled his arguments in the most becoming manner. Fever is
an argument that cannot be answered, and Raoul had an attack. Athos
was in his study, making additions to his memoirs, when Raoul entered,
accompanied by Grimaud. Keen-sighted and penetrating, a mere glance at
his son told him that something extraordinary had befallen him.

“You seem to come on a matter of importance,” said he to Raoul, after he
had embraced him, pointing to a seat.

“Yes, monsieur,” replied the young man; “and I entreat you to give me
the same kind attention that has never yet failed me.”

“Speak, Raoul.”

“I present the case to you, monsieur, free from all preface, for that
would be unworthy of you. Mademoiselle de la Valliere is in Paris as one
of Madame’s maids of honor. I have pondered deeply on the matter; I love
Mademoiselle de la Valliere above everything; and it is not proper to
leave her in a position where her reputation, her virtue even, may be
assailed. It is my wish, therefore, to marry her, monsieur, and I have
come to solicit your consent to my marriage.”

While this communication was being made to him, Athos maintained the
profoundest silence and reserve. Raoul, who had begun his address with
an assumption of self-possession, finished it by allowing a manifest
emotion to escape him at every word. Athos fixed upon Bragelonne a
searching look, overshadowed indeed by a slight sadness.

“You have reflected well upon it?” he inquired.

“Yes, monsieur.”

“I believe you are already acquainted with my views respecting this
alliance?”

“Yes, monsieur,” replied Raoul, in a low tone of voice; “but you added,
that if I persisted--”

“You do persist, then?”

Raoul stammered out an almost unintelligible assent.

“Your passion,” continued Athos, tranquilly, “must indeed be very great,
since, notwithstanding my dislike to this union, you persist in wanting
it.”

Raoul passed his hand trembling across his forehead to remove the
perspiration that collected there. Athos looked at him, and his heart
was touched by pity. He rose and said,--

“It is no matter. My own personal feelings are not to be taken into
consideration since yours are concerned; I am ready to give it. Tell me
what you want.”

“Your kind indulgence, first of all, monsieur,” said Raoul, taking hold
of his hand.

“You have mistaken my feelings, Raoul, I have more than mere indulgence
for you in my heart.”

Raoul kissed as devotedly as a lover could have done the hand he held in
his own.

“Come, come,” said Athos, “I am quite ready; what do you wish me to
sign?”

“Nothing whatever, monsieur, only it would be very kind if you would
take the trouble to write to the king, to whom I belong, and solicit his
majesty’s permission for me to marry Mademoiselle de la Valliere.”

“Well thought, Raoul! After, or rather before myself, you have a master
to consult, that master being the king; it is loyal in you to submit
yourself voluntarily to this double proof; I will grant your request
without delay, Raoul.”

The count approached the window, and leaning out, called to Grimaud,
who showed his head from an arbor covered with jasmine, which he was
occupied in trimming.

“My horses, Grimaud,” continued the count.

“Why this order, monsieur?” inquired Raoul.

“We shall set off in a few hours.”

“Whither?”

“For Paris.”

“Paris, monsieur?”

“Is not the king at Paris?”

“Certainly.”

“Well, ought we not to go there?”

“Yes, monsieur,” said Raoul, almost alarmed by this kind condescension.
“I do not ask you to put yourself to such inconvenience, and a letter
merely--”

“You mistake my position, Raoul; it is not respectful that a simple
gentleman, such as I am, should write to his sovereign. I wish to speak,
I ought to speak, to the king, and I will do so. We will go together,
Raoul.”

“You overpower me with your kindness, monsieur.”

“How do you think his majesty is affected?”

“Towards me, monsieur?”

“Yes.”

“Excellently well disposed.”

“You _know_ that to be so?” continued the count.

“The king has himself told me so.”

“On what occasion?”

“Upon the recommendation of M. d’Artagnan, I believe, and on account of
an affair in the Place de Greve, when I had the honor to draw my sword
in the king’s service. I have reason to believe that, vanity apart, I
stand well with his majesty.”

“So much the better.”

“But I entreat you, monsieur,” pursued Raoul, “not to maintain towards
me your present grave and serious manner. Do not make me bitterly regret
having listened to a feeling stronger than anything else.”

“That is the second time you have said so, Raoul; it was quite
unnecessary; you require my formal consent, and you have it. We need
talk no more on the subject, therefore. Come and see my new plantations,
Raoul.”

The young man knew very well, that, after the expression of his father’s
wish, no opportunity of discussion was left him. He bowed his head, and
followed his father into the garden. Athos slowly pointed out to him
the grafts, the cuttings, and the avenues he was planting. This perfect
repose of manner disconcerted Raoul extremely; the affection with which
his own heart was filled seemed so great that the whole world could
hardly contain it. How, then, could his father’s heart remain void,
and closed to its influence? Bragelonne, therefore, collecting all his
courage, suddenly exclaimed,--

“It is impossible, monsieur, you can have any reason to reject
Mademoiselle de la Valliere! In Heaven’s name, she is so good, so
gentle and pure, that your mind, so perfect in its penetration, ought
to appreciate her accordingly. Does any secret repugnance, or any
hereditary dislike, exist between you and her family?”

“Look, Raoul, at that beautiful lily of the valley,” said Athos;
“observe how the shade and the damp situation suit it, particularly the
shadow which that sycamore-tree casts over it, so that the warmth, and
not the blazing heat of the sun, filters through its leaves.”

Raoul stopped, bit his lips, and then, with the blood mantling in his
face, he said, courageously,--“One word of explanation, I beg, monsieur.
You cannot forget that your son is a man.”

“In that case,” replied Athos, drawing himself up with sternness, “prove
to me that you are a man, for you do not show yourself a son. I begged
you to wait the opportunity of forming an illustrious alliance. I would
have obtained a wife for you from the first ranks of the rich nobility.
I wish you to be distinguished by the splendor which glory and fortune
confer, for nobility of descent you have already.”

“Monsieur,” exclaimed Raoul, carried away by a first impulse. “I was
reproached the other day for not knowing who my mother was.”

Athos turned pale; then, knitting his brows like the greatest of all
the heathen deities:--“I am waiting to learn the reply you made,” he
demanded, in an imperious manner.

“Forgive me! oh, forgive me,” murmured the young man, sinking at once
from the lofty tone he had assumed.

“What was your reply, monsieur?” inquired the count, stamping his feet
upon the ground.

“Monsieur, my sword was in my hand immediately, my adversary placed
himself on guard, I struck his sword over the palisade, and threw him
after it.”

“Why did you suffer him to live?”

“The king has prohibited duelling, and, at the moment, I was an
ambassador of the king.”

“Very well,” said Athos, “but all the greater reason I should see his
majesty.”

“What do you intend to ask him?”

“Authority to draw my sword against the man who has inflicted this
injury upon me.”

“If I did not act as I ought to have done, I beg you to forgive me.”

“Did I reproach you, Raoul?”

“Still, the permission you are going to ask from the king?”

“I will implore his majesty to sign your marriage-contract, but on one
condition.”

“Are conditions necessary with me, monsieur? Command, and you shall be
obeyed.”

“On the condition, I repeat,” continued Athos; “that you tell me the
name of the man who spoke of your mother in that way.”

“What need is there that you should know his name; the offense was
directed against myself, and the permission once obtained from his
majesty, to revenge it is my affair.”

“Tell me his name, monsieur.”

“I will not allow you to expose yourself.”

“Do you take me for a Don Diego? His name, I say.”

“You insist upon it?”

“I demand it.”

“The Vicomte de Wardes.”

“Very well,” said Athos, tranquilly, “I know him. But our horses are
ready, I see; and, instead of delaying our departure for a couple of
hours, we will set off at once. Come, monsieur.”



Chapter XVI. Monsieur Becomes Jealous of the Duke of Buckingham.

While the Comte de la Fere was proceeding on his way to Pairs,
accompanied by Raoul, the Palais Royal was the theatre wherein a scene
of what Moliere would have called excellent comedy, was being performed.
Four days had elapsed since his marriage, and Monsieur, having
breakfasted very hurriedly, passed into his ante-chamber, frowning and
out of temper. The repast had not been over-agreeable. Madame had had
breakfast served in her own apartment, and Monsieur had breakfasted
almost alone; the Chevalier de Lorraine and Manicamp were the only
persons present at the meal, which lasted three-quarters of an hour
without a single syllable having been uttered. Manicamp, who was less
intimate with his royal highness than the Chevalier de Lorraine, vainly
endeavored to detect, from the expression of the prince’s face, what had
made him so ill-humored. The Chevalier de Lorraine, who had no occasion
to speculate about anything, inasmuch as he knew all, ate his breakfast
with that extraordinary appetite which the troubles of one’s friends but
stimulates, and enjoyed at the same time both Monsieur’s ill-humor and
the vexation of Manicamp. He seemed delighted, while he went on eating,
to detain a prince, who was very impatient to move, still at table.
Monsieur at times repented the ascendency which he had permitted the
Chevalier de Lorraine to acquire over him, and which exempted the latter
from any observance of etiquette towards him. Monsieur was now in one
of those moods, but he dreaded as much as he liked the chevalier, and
contented himself with nursing his anger without betraying it. Every
now and then Monsieur raised his eyes to the ceiling, then lowered them
towards the slices of _pate_ which the chevalier was attacking, and
finally, not caring to betray the resentment, he gesticulated in a
manner which Harlequin might have envied. At last, however, Monsieur
could control himself no longer, and at the dessert, rising from the
table in excessive wrath, as we have related, he left the Chevalier de
Lorraine to finish his breakfast as he pleased. Seeing Monsieur rise
from the table, Manicamp, napkin in hand, rose also. Monsieur ran rather
than walked, towards the ante-chamber, where, noticing an usher in
attendance, he gave him some directions in a low tone of voice.
Then, turning back again, but avoiding passing through the breakfast
apartment, he crossed several rooms, with the intention of seeking the
queen-mother in her oratory, where she usually remained.

It was about ten o’clock in the morning. Anne of Austria was engaged in
writing as Monsieur entered. The queen-mother was extremely attached to
her son, for he was handsome in person and amiable in disposition. He
was, in fact, more affectionate, and it might be, more effeminate
than the king. He pleased his mother by those trifling sympathizing
attentions all women are glad to receive. Anne of Austria, who would
have been rejoiced to have had a daughter, almost found in this, her
favorite son, the attentions, solicitude, and playful manners of a
child of twelve years of age. All the time he passed with his mother he
employed in admiring her arms, in giving his opinion upon her cosmetics,
and recipes for compounding essences, in which she was very particular;
and then, too, he kissed her hands and cheeks in the most childlike and
endearing manner, and had always some sweetmeats to offer her, or some
new style of dress to recommend. Anne of Austria loved the king,
or rather the regal power in her eldest son; Louis XIV. represented
legitimacy by right divine. With the king, her character was that of
the queen-mother, with Philip she was simply the mother. The latter
knew that, of all places, a mother’s heart is the most compassionate and
surest. When quite a child he always fled there for refuge when he and
his brother quarreled, often, after having struck him, which constituted
the crime of high treason on his part, after certain engagements with
hands and nails, in which the king and his rebellious subject indulged
in their night-dresses respecting the right to a disputed bed, having
their servant Laporte as umpire,--Philip, conqueror, but terrified at
victory, used to flee to his mother to obtain reinforcements from her,
or at least the assurance of forgiveness, which Louis XIV. granted with
difficulty, and after an interval. Anne, from this habit of peaceable
intervention, succeeded in arranging the disputes of her sons, and in
sharing, at the same time, all their secrets. The king, somewhat jealous
of that maternal solicitude which was bestowed particularly on his
brother, felt disposed to show towards Anne of Austria more submission
and attachment than his character really dictated. Anne of Austria had
adopted this line of conduct especially towards the young queen. In this
manner she ruled with almost despotic sway over the royal household, and
she was already preparing her batteries to govern with the same absolute
authority the household of her second son. Anne experienced almost
a feeling of pride whenever she saw any one enter her apartment with
woe-begone looks, pale cheeks, or red eyes, gathering from appearances
that assistance was required either by the weakest or the most
rebellious. She was writing, we have said, when Monsieur entered her
oratory, not with red eyes or pale cheeks, but restless, out of temper,
and annoyed. With an absent air he kissed his mother’s hands, and sat
himself down before receiving her permission to do so. Considering the
strict rules of etiquette established at the court of Anne of Austria,
this forgetfulness of customary civilities was a sign of preoccupation,
especially on Philip’s part, who, of his own accord, observed a respect
towards her of a somewhat exaggerated character. If, therefore, he so
notoriously failed in this regard, there must be a serious cause for it.

“What is the matter, Philip?” inquired Anne of Austria, turning towards
her son.

“A good many things,” murmured the prince, in a doleful tone of voice.

“You look like a man who has a great deal to do,” said the queen, laying
down her pen. Philip frowned, but did not reply. “Among the various
subjects which occupy your mind,” said Anne of Austria, “there must
surely be one that absorbs it more than others.”

“One has indeed occupied me more than any other.”

“Well, what is it? I am listening.”

Philip opened his mouth as if to express all the troubles his mind was
filled with, and which he seemed to be waiting only for an opportunity
of declaring. But he suddenly became silent, and a sigh alone expressed
all that his heart was overflowing with.

“Come, Philip, show a little firmness,” said the queen-mother. “When one
has to complain of anything, it is generally an individual who is the
cause of it. Am I not right?”

“I do not say no, madame.”

“Whom do you wish to speak about? Come, take courage.”

“In fact, madame, what I might possibly have to say must be kept a
profound secret; for when a lady is in the case--”

“Ah! you are speaking of Madame, then?” inquired the queen-mother, with
a feeling of the liveliest curiosity.

“Yes.”

“Well, then, if you wish to speak of Madame, do not hesitate to do so. I
am your mother, and she is no more than a stranger to me. Yet, as she is
my daughter-in-law, rest assured I shall be interested, even were it for
your own sake alone, in hearing all you may have to say about her.”

“Pray tell me, madame, in your turn, whether you have not remarked
something?”

“‘Something’! Philip? Your words almost frighten me, from their want of
meaning. What do you mean by ‘something?’”

“Madame is pretty, certainly.”

“No doubt of it.”

“Yet not altogether beautiful.”

“No, but as she grows older, she will probably become strikingly
beautiful. You must have remarked the change which a few years have
already made in her. Her beauty will improve more and more; she is now
only sixteen years of age. At fifteen I was, myself, very thin; but even
as she is at present, Madame is very pretty.”

“And consequently others have remarked it.”

“Undoubtedly, for a woman of ordinary rank is noticed--and with still
greater reason a princess.”

“She has been well brought up, I suppose?”

“Madame Henriette, her mother, is a woman somewhat cold in manner,
slightly pretentious, but full of noble thoughts. The princess’s
education may have been neglected, but her principles, I believe, are
good. Such at least was the opinion I formed of her when she resided in
France; but she afterwards returned to England, and I am ignorant what
may have occurred there.”

“What do you mean?”

“Simply that there are some heads naturally giddy, which are easily
turned by prosperity.”

“That is the very word, madame. I think the princess rather giddy.”

“We must not exaggerate, Philip; she is clever and witty, and has a
certain amount of coquetry very natural in a young woman; but this
defect in persons of high rank and position, is a great advantage at a
court. A princess who is tinged with coquetry usually forms a brilliant
court; her smile stimulates luxury, arouses wit, and even courage; the
nobles, too, fight better for a prince whose wife is beautiful.”

“Thank you extremely, madame,” said Philip, with some temper; “you
really have drawn some very alarming pictures for me.”

“In what respect?” asked the queen, with pretended simplicity.

“You know, madame,” said Philip, dolefully, “whether I had or had not a
very great dislike to getting married.”

“Now, indeed, you alarm me. You have some serious cause of complaint
against Madame.”

“I do not precisely say it is serious.”

“In that case, then, throw aside your doleful looks. If you show
yourself to others in your present state, people will take you for a
very unhappy husband.”

“The fact is,” replied Philip, “I am not altogether satisfied as a
husband, and I shall not be sorry if others know it.”

“For shame, Philip.”

“Well, then, madame, I will tell you frankly that I do not understand
the life I am required to lead.”

“Explain yourself.”

“My wife does not seem to belong to me; she is always leaving me
for some reason or another. In the mornings there are visits,
correspondences, and toilettes; in the evenings, balls and concerts.”

“You are jealous, Philip.”

“I! Heaven forbid. Let others act the part of a jealous husband, not I.
But I _am_ annoyed.”

“All these things you reproach your wife with are perfectly innocent,
and, so long as you have nothing of greater importance--”

“Yet, listen; without being very blamable, a woman can excite a
good deal of uneasiness. Certain visitors may be received, certain
preferences shown, which expose young women to remark, and which are
enough to drive out of their senses even those husbands who are least
disposed to be jealous.”

“Ah! now we are coming to the real point at last, and not without some
difficulty. You speak of frequent visits, and certain preferences--very
good; for the last hour we have been beating about the bush, and at last
you have broached the true question.”

“Well then, yes--”

“This is more serious than I thought. It is possible, then, that Madame
can have given you grounds for these complaints against her?”

“Precisely so.”

“What, your wife, married only four days ago, prefers some other person
to yourself? Take care, Philip, you exaggerate your grievances; in
wishing to prove everything, you prove nothing.”

The prince, bewildered by his mother’s serious manner, wished to reply,
but he could only stammer out some unintelligible words.

“You draw back, then?” said Anne of Austria. “I prefer that, as it is an
acknowledgement of your mistake.”

“No!” exclaimed Philip, “I do not draw back, and I will prove all I
asserted. I spoke of preference and of visits, did I not? Well, listen.”

Anne of Austria prepared herself to listen, with that love of gossip
which the best woman living and the best mother, were she a queen even,
always finds in being mixed up with the petty squabbles of a household.

“Well,” said Philip, “tell me one thing.”

“What is that?”

“Why does my wife retain an English court about her?” said Philip, as
he crossed his arms and looked his mother steadily in the face, as if he
were convinced that she could not answer the question.

“For a very simple reason,” returned Anne of Austria; “because the
English are her countrymen, because they have expended large sums in
order to accompany her to France, and because it would hardly be polite
--not politic, certainly--to dismiss abruptly those members of the
English nobility who have not shrunk from any devotion or sacrifice.”

“A wonderful sacrifice indeed,” returned Philip, “to desert a wretched
country to come to a beautiful one, where a greater effect can
be produced for a guinea that can be procured elsewhere for four!
Extraordinary devotion, really, to travel a hundred leagues in company
with a woman one is in love with!”

“In love, Philip! think what you are saying. Who is in love with
Madame?”

“The Duke of Buckingham. Perhaps you will defend him, too?”

Anne of Austria blushed and smiled at the same time. The name of the
Duke of Buckingham recalled certain recollections of a very tender and
melancholy nature. “The Duke of Buckingham?” she murmured.

“Yes; one of those arm-chair soldiers--”

“The Buckinghams are loyal and brave,” said Anne of Austria,
courageously.

“This is too bad; my own mother takes the part of my wife’s lover
against me,” exclaimed Philip, incensed to such an extent that his weak
organization was affected almost to tears.

“Philip, my son,” exclaimed Anne of Austria, “such an expression is
unworthy of you. Your wife has no lover; and, had she one, it would not
be the Duke of Buckingham. The members of that family, I repeat,
are loyal and discreet, and the rights of hospitality are sure to be
respected by them.”

“The Duke of Buckingham is an Englishman, madame,” said Philip, “and may
I ask if the English so very religiously respect what belongs to princes
of France?”

Anne blushed a second time, and turned aside under the pretext of taking
her pen from her desk again, but in reality to conceal her confusion
from her son. “Really, Philip,” she said, “you seem to discover
expressions for the purpose of embarrassing me, and your anger blinds
you while it alarms me; reflect a little.”

“There is no need for reflection, madame. I can see with my own eyes.”

“Well, and what do you see?”

“That Buckingham never quits my wife. He presumes to make presents to
her, and she ventures to accept them. Yesterday she was talking about
_sauchets a la violette_; well, our French perfumers, you know very
well, madame, for you have over and over again asked for it without
success--our French perfumers, I say, have never been able to procure
this scent. The duke, however, wore about him a _sachet a la violette_,
and I am sure that the one my wife has came from him.”

“Indeed, monsieur,” said Anne of Austria, “you build your pyramids on
needle points; be careful. What harm, I ask you, can there be in a man
giving to his countrywoman a recipe for a new essence? These strange
ideas, I protest, painfully recall your father to me; he who so
frequently and so unjustly made me suffer.”

“The Duke of Buckingham’s father was probably more reserved and more
respectful than his son,” said Philip, thoughtlessly, not perceiving how
deeply he had wounded his mother’s feelings. The queen turned pale,
and pressed her clenched hands upon her bosom; but, recovering herself
immediately, she said, “You came here with some intention or another, I
suppose?”

“Certainly.”

“What was it?”

“I came, madame, intending to complain energetically, and to inform you
that I will not submit to such behavior from the Duke of Buckingham.”

“What do you intend to do, then?”

“I shall complain to the king.”

“And what do you expect the king to reply?”

“Very well, then,” said Monsieur, with an expression of stern
determination on his countenance, which offered a singular contrast to
its usual gentleness. “Very well. I will right myself!”

“What do you call righting yourself?” inquired Anne of Austria, in
alarm.

“I will have the Duke of Buckingham quit the princess, I will have him
quit France, and I will see that my wishes are intimated to him.”

“You will intimate nothing of the kind, Philip,” said the queen, “for if
you act in that manner, and violate hospitality to that extent, I will
invoke the severity of the king against you.”

“Do you threaten me, madame?” exclaimed Philip, almost in tears; “do you
threaten me in the midst of my complaints?”

“I do not threaten you; I do but place an obstacle in the path of your
hasty anger. I maintain, that, to adopt towards the Duke of Buckingham,
or any other Englishman, any rigorous measure--to take even a
discourteous step towards him, would be to plunge France and England
into the most disastrous disagreement. Can it be possible that a prince
of the blood, the brother of the king of France, does not know how to
hide an injury, even did it exist in reality, where political necessity
requires it?” Philip made a movement. “Besides,” continued the queen,
“the injury is neither true nor possible, and it is merely a matter of
silly jealousy.”

“Madame, I know what I know.”

“Whatever you may know, I can only advise you to be patient.”

“I am not patient by disposition, madame.”

The queen rose, full of severity, and with an icy ceremonious manner.
“Explain what you really require, monsieur,” she said.

“I do not require anything, madame; I simply express what I desire.
If the Duke of Buckingham does not, of his own accord, discontinue his
visits to my apartments I shall forbid him entrance.”

“That is a point you will refer to the king,” said Anne of Austria, her
heart swelling as she spoke, and her voice trembling with emotion.

“But, madame,” exclaimed Philip, striking his hands together, “act as my
mother and not as the queen, since I speak to you as a son; it is simply
a matter of a few minutes’ conversation between the duke and myself.”

“It is that very conversation I forbid,” said the queen, resuming her
authority, “because it is unworthy of you.”

“Be it so; I will not appear in the matter, but I shall intimate my will
to Madame.”

“Oh!” said the queen-mother, with a melancholy arising from reflection,
“never tyrannize over a wife--never behave too haughtily or imperiously
towards your own. A woman unwillingly convinced, is unconvinced.”

“What is to be done, then?--I will consult my friends about it.”

“Yes, your double-dealing advisers, your Chevalier de Lorraine--your De
Wardes. Intrust the conduct of this affair to me. You wish the Duke of
Buckingham to leave, do you not?”

“As soon as possible, madame.”

“Send the duke to me, then; smile upon your wife, behave to her, to the
king, to every one, as usual. But follow no advice but mine. Alas! I too
well know what any household comes to, that is troubled by advisers.”

“You shall be obeyed, madame.”

“And you will be satisfied at the result. Send the duke to me.”

“That will not be difficult.”

“Where do you suppose him to be?”

“At my wife’s door, whose _levee_ he is probably awaiting.”

“Very well,” said Anne of Austria, calmly. “Be good enough to tell the
duke that I shall be charmed if he will pay me a visit.”

Philip kissed his mother’s hand, and started off to find the Duke of
Buckingham.



Chapter XVII. Forever!

The Duke of Buckingham, obedient to the queen-mother’s invitation,
presented himself in her apartments half an hour after the departure of
the Duc d’Orleans. When his name was announced by the gentleman-usher
in attendance, the queen, who was sitting with her elbow resting on a
table, and her head buried in her hands, rose, and smilingly received
the graceful and respectful salutation which the duke addressed to her.
Anne of Austria was still beautiful. It is well known that at her then
somewhat advanced age, her long auburn hair, perfectly formed hands, and
bright ruby lips, were still the admiration of all who saw her. On the
present occasion, abandoned entirely to a remembrance which evoked all
the past in her heart, she looked almost as beautiful as in the days
of her youth, when her palace was open to the visits of the Duke of
Buckingham’s father, then a young and impassioned man, as well as an
unfortunate prince, who lived for her alone, and died with her name upon
his lips. Anne of Austria fixed upon Buckingham a look so tender in
its expression, that it denoted, not alone the indulgence of maternal
affection, but a gentleness of expression like the coquetry of a woman
who loves.

“Your majesty,” said Buckingham, respectfully, “desired to speak to me.”

“Yes, duke,” said the queen, in English; “will you be good enough to sit
down?”

The favor which Anne of Austria thus extended to the young man, and the
welcome sound of the language of a country from which the duke had been
estranged since his stay in France, deeply affected him. He immediately
conjectured that the queen had a request to make of him. After having
abandoned the first few moments to the irrepressible emotions she
experienced, the queen resumed the smiling air with which she had
received him. “What do you think of France?” she said, in French.

“It is a lovely country, madame,” replied the duke.

“Had you ever seen it before?”

“Once only, madame.”

“But, like all true Englishmen, you prefer England?”

“I prefer my own native land to France,” replied the duke; “but if
your majesty were to ask me which of the two cities, London or Pairs, I
should prefer as a residence, I should be forced to answer Paris.”

Anne of Austria observed the ardent manner with which these words had
been pronounced. “I am told, my lord, you have rich possessions in your
own country, and that you live in a splendid and time-honored place.”

“It was my father’s residence,” replied Buckingham, casting down his
eyes.

“Those are indeed great advantages and _souvenirs_,” replied the
queen, alluding, in spite of herself, to recollections from which it is
impossible voluntarily to detach one’s self.

“In fact,” said the duke, yielding to the melancholy influence of this
opening conversation, “sensitive persons live as much in the past or the
future, as in the present.”

“That is very true,” said the queen, in a low tone of voice. “It
follows, then, my lord,” she added, “that you, who are a man of feeling,
will soon quit France in order to shut yourself up with your wealth and
your relics of the past.”

Buckingham raised his head and said, “I think not, madame.”

“What do you mean?”

“On the contrary, I think of leaving England in order to take up my
residence in France.”

It was now Anne of Austria’s turn to exhibit surprise. “Why?” she said.
“Are you not in favor with the new king?”

“Perfectly so, madame, for his majesty’s kindness to me is unbounded.”

“It cannot,” said the queen, “be because your fortune has diminished,
for it is said to be enormous.”

“My income, madame, has never been so large.”

“There is some secret cause, then?”

“No, madame,” said Buckingham, eagerly, “there is nothing secret in my
reason for this determination. I prefer residence in France; I like
a court so distinguished by its refinement and courtesy; I like
the amusements, somewhat serious in their nature, which are not the
amusements of my own country, and which are met with in France.”

Anne of Austria smiled shrewdly. “Amusements of a serious nature?” she
said. “Has your Grace well reflected on their seriousness?” The duke
hesitated. “There is no amusement so serious,” continued the queen, “as
to prevent a man of your rank--”

“Your majesty seems to insist greatly on that point,” interrupted the
duke.

“Do you think so, my lord?”

“If you will forgive me for saying so, it is the second time you have
vaunted the attractions of England at the expense of the delight which
all experience who live in France.”

Anne of Austria approached the young man, and placing her beautiful
hand upon his shoulder, which trembled at the touch, said, “Believe me,
monsieur, nothing can equal a residence in one’s own native country. I
have very frequently had occasion to regret Spain. I have lived long, my
lord, very long for a woman, and I confess to you, that not a year has
passed I have not regretted Spain.”

“Not one year, madame?” said the young duke coldly. “Not one of those
years when you reigned Queen of Beauty--as you still are, indeed?”

“A truce to flattery, duke, for I am old enough to be your mother.” She
emphasized these latter words in a manner, and with a gentleness, which
penetrated Buckingham’s heart. “Yes,” she said, “I am old enough to be
your mother; and for this reason, I will give you a word of advice.”

“That advice being that I should return to London?” he exclaimed.

“Yes, my lord.”

The duke clasped his hands with a terrified gesture, which could not
fail of its effect upon the queen, already disposed to softer feelings
by the tenderness of her own recollections. “It must be so,” added the
queen.

“What!” he again exclaimed, “am I seriously told that I must
leave,--that I must exile myself,--that I am to flee at once?”

“Exile yourself, did you say? One would fancy France was your native
country.”

“Madame, the country of those who love is the country of those whom they
love.”

“Not another word, my lord; you forget whom you are addressing.”

Buckingham threw himself on his knees. “Madame, you are the source of
intelligence, of goodness, and of compassion; you are the first person
in this kingdom, not only by your rank, but the first person in the
world on account of your angelic attributes. I have said nothing,
madame. Have I, indeed, said anything you should answer with such a
cruel remark? What have I betrayed?”

“You have betrayed yourself,” said the queen, in a low tone of voice.

“I have said nothing,--I know nothing.”

“You forget you have spoken and thought in the presence of a woman; and
besides--”

“Besides,” said the duke, “no one knows you are listening to me.”

“On the contrary, it is known; you have all the defects and all the
qualities of youth.”

“I have been betrayed or denounced, then?”

“By whom?”

“By those who, at Le Havre, had, with infernal perspicacity, read my
heart like an open book.”

“I do not know whom you mean.”

“M. de Bragelonne, for instance.”

“I know the name without being acquainted with the person to whom it
belongs. M. de Bragelonne has said nothing.”

“Who can it be, then? If any one, madame, had had the boldness to notice
in me that which I do not myself wish to behold--”

“What would you do, duke?”

“There are secrets which kill those who discover them.”

“He, then, who has discovered your secret, madman that you are, still
lives; and, what is more, you will not slay him, for he is armed on all
sides,--he is a husband, a jealous man,--he is the second gentleman in
France,--he is my son, the Duc du Orleans.”

The duke turned pale as death. “You are very cruel, madame,” he said.

“You see, Buckingham,” said Anne of Austria, sadly, “how you pass from
one extreme to another, and fight with shadows, when it would seem so
easy to remain at peace with yourself.”

“If we fight, madame, we die on the field of battle,” replied the young
man, gently, abandoning himself to the most gloomy depression.

Anne ran towards him and took him by the hand. “Villiers,” she said, in
English, with a vehemence of tone which nothing could resist, “what
is it you ask? Do you ask a mother to sacrifice her son,--a queen to
consent to the dishonor of her house? Child that you are, do not dream
of it. What! in order to spare your tears am I to commit these crimes?
Villiers! you speak of the dead; the dead, at least, were full of
respect and submission; they resigned themselves to an order of exile;
they carried their despair away with them in their hearts, like a
priceless possession, because the despair was caused by the woman they
loved, and because death, thus deceptive, was like a gift of a favor
conferred upon them.”

Buckingham rose, his features distorted, and his hands pressed against
his heart. “You are right, madame,” he said, “but those of whom you
speak had received their order of exile from the lips of the one whom
they loved; they were not driven away; they were entreated to leave, and
were not laughed at.”

“No,” murmured Anne of Austria, “they were not forgotten. But who says
you are driven away, or that you are exiled? Who says that your devotion
will not be remembered? I do not speak on any one’s behalf but my own,
when I tell you to leave. Do me this kindness,--grant me this favor; let
me, for this also, be indebted to one of your name.”

“It is for your sake, then, madame?”

“For mine alone.”

“No one whom I shall leave behind me will venture to mock,--no prince
even who shall say, ‘I required it.’”

“Listen to me, duke,” and hereupon the dignified features of the queen
assumed a solemn expression. “I swear to you that no one commands in
this matter but myself. I swear to you that, not only shall no one
either laugh or boast in any way, but no one even shall fail in the
respect due to your rank. Rely upon me, duke, as I rely upon you.”

“You do not explain yourself, madame; my heart is full of bitterness,
and I am in utter despair; no consolation, however gentle and
affectionate, can afford me relief.”

“Do you remember your mother, duke?” replied the queen, with a winning
smile.

“Very slightly, madame; yet I remember how she used to cover me with her
caresses and her tears whenever I wept.”

“Villiers,” murmured the queen, passing her arm round the young man’s
neck, “look upon me as your mother, and believe that no one shall ever
make my son weep.”

“I thank you, madame,” said the young man affected and almost suffocated
by his emotion; “I feel there is still room in my heart for a gentler
and nobler sentiment than love.”

The queen-mother looked at him and pressed his hand. “Go,” she said.

“When must I leave? Command me.”

“At any time that may suit you, my lord,” resumed the queen; “you will
choose your own day of departure. Instead, however, of setting off
to-day, as you would doubtless wish to do, or to-morrow, as others
may have expected, leave the day after to-morrow, in the evening; but
announce to-day that it is your wish to leave.”

“My wish?” murmured the young duke.

“Yes, duke.”

“And shall I never return to France?”

Anne of Austria reflected for a moment, seemingly absorbed in sad and
serious thought. “It would be a consolation for me,” she said, “if
you were to return on the day when I shall be carried to my final
resting-place at Saint-Dennis beside the king, my husband.”

“Madame, you are goodness itself; the tide of prosperity is setting in
on you; your cup brims over with happiness, and many long years are yet
before you.”

“In that case you will not come for some time, then,” said the queen,
endeavoring to smile.

“I shall not return,” said Buckingham, “young as I am. Death does not
reckon by years; it is impartial; some die young, some reach old age.”

“I will not harbor any sorrowful ideas, duke. Let me comfort you; return
in two years. I perceive from your face that the very idea which saddens
you so much now, will have disappeared before six months have passed,
and will be not only dead but forgotten in the period of absence I have
assigned you.”

“I think you judged me better a little while ago, madame,” replied the
young man, “when you said that time is powerless against members of the
family of Buckingham.”

“Silence,” said the queen, kissing the duke upon the forehead with an
affection she could not restrain. “Go, go; spare me and forget yourself
no longer. I am the queen; you are the subject of the king of England;
King Charles awaits your return. Adieu, Villiers,--farewell.”

“Forever!” replied the young man, and he fled, endeavoring to master his
emotions.

Anne leaned her head upon her hands, and then looking at herself in the
glass, murmured, “It has been truly said, that a woman who has truly
loved is always young, and that the bloom of the girl of twenty years
ever lies concealed in some secret cloister of the heart.” [1]



Chapter XVIII. King Louis XIV. does not think Mademoiselle de la
Valliere either rich enough or pretty enough for a Gentleman of the Rank
of the Vicomte de Bragelonne.


Raoul and the Comte de la Fere reached Paris the evening of the same day
on which Buckingham had held the conversation with the queen-mother.
The count had scarcely arrived, when, through Raoul, he solicited an
audience of the king. His majesty had passed a portion of the morning in
looking over, with madame and the ladies of the court, various goods of
Lyons manufacture, of which he had made his sister-in-law a present. A
court dinner had succeeded, then cards, and afterwards, according to his
usual custom, the king, leaving the card-tables at eight o’clock, passed
into his cabinet in order to work with M. Colbert and M. Fouquet. Raoul
entered the ante-chamber at the very moment the two ministers quitted
it, and the king, perceiving him through the half-closed door, said,
“What do you want, M. de Bragelonne?”

The young man approached: “An audience, sire,” he replied, “for the
Comte de la Fere, who has just arrived from Blois, and is most anxious
to have an interview with your majesty.”

“I have an hour to spare between cards and supper,” said the king. “Is
the Comte de la Fere at hand?”

“He is below, and awaits your majesty’s permission.”

“Let him come up at once,” said the king, and five minutes afterwards
Athos entered the presence of Louis XIV. He was received by the king
with that gracious kindness of manner which Louis, with a tact beyond
his years, reserved for the purpose of gaining those who were not to be
conquered by ordinary favors. “Let me hope, comte,” said the king, “that
you have come to ask me for something.”

“I will not conceal from your majesty,” replied the comte, “that I am
indeed come for that purpose.”

“That is well,” said the king, joyously.

“It is not for myself, sire.”

“So much the worse; but, at least, I will do for your _protege_ what you
refuse to permit me to do for you.”

“Your majesty encourages me. I have come to speak on behalf of the
Vicomte de Bragelonne.”

“It is the same as if you spoke on your own behalf, comte.”

“Not altogether so, sire. I am desirous of obtaining from your majesty
that which I cannot ask for myself. The vicomte thinks of marrying.”

“He is still very young; but that does not matter. He is an eminently
distinguished man; I will choose a wife for him.”

“He has already chosen one, sire, and only awaits your consent.”

“It is only a question, then, of signing the marriage-contract?” Athos
bowed. “Has he chose a wife whose fortune and position accord with your
own anticipation?”

Athos hesitated for a moment. “His affirmed wife is of good birth, but
has no fortune.”

“That is a misfortune we can remedy.”

“You overwhelm me with gratitude, sire; but your majesty will permit me
to offer a remark?”

“Do so, comte.”

“Your majesty seems to intimate an intention of giving a
marriage-portion to this young lady.”

“Certainly.”

“I should regret, sire, if the step I have taken towards your majesty
should be attended by this result.”

“No false delicacy, comte; what is the bride’s name?”

“Mademoiselle de la Baume le Blanc de la Valliere,” said Athos, coldly.

“I seem to know that name,” said the king, as if reflecting; “there was
a Marquis de la Valliere.”

“Yes, sire, it is his daughter.”

“But he died, and his widow married again M. de Saint-Remy, I think,
steward of the dowager Madame’s household.”

“Your majesty is correctly informed.”

“More than that, the young lady has lately become one of the princess’s
maids of honor.”

“Your majesty is better acquainted with her history than am I.”

The king again reflected, and glancing at the comte’s anxious
countenance, said: “The young lady does not seem to me to be very
pretty, comte.”

“I am not quite sure,” replied Athos.

“I have seen her, but she hardly struck me as being so.”

“She seems to be a good and modest girl, but has little beauty, sire.”

“Beautiful fair hair, however.”

“I think so.”

“And her blue eyes are tolerably good.”

“Yes, sire.”

“With regard to her beauty, then, the match is but an ordinary one. Now
for the money side of the question.”

“Fifteen to twenty thousand francs dowry at the very outset, sire; the
lovers are disinterested enough; for myself, I care little for money.”

“For superfluity, you mean; but a needful amount is of importance. With
fifteen thousand francs, without landed property, a woman cannot live at
court. We will make up the deficiency; I will do it for De Bragelonne.”
 The king again remarked the coldness with which Athos received the
remark.

“Let us pass from the question of money to that of rank,” said Louis
XIV.; “the daughter of the Marquis de la Valliere, that is well enough;
but there is that excellent Saint-Remy, who somewhat damages the credit
of the family; and you, comte, are rather particular, I believe, about
your own family.”

“Sire, I no longer hold to anything but my devotion to your majesty.”

The king again paused. “A moment, comte. You have surprised me in no
little degree from the beginning of your conversation. You came to ask
me to authorize a marriage, and you seem greatly disturbed in having to
make the request. Nay, pardon me, comte, but I am rarely deceived,
young as I am; for while with some persons I place my friendship at the
disposal of my understanding, with others I call my distrust to my aid,
by which my discernment is increased. I repeat, that you do not prefer
your request as though you wished it success.”

“Well, sire, that is true.”

“I do not understand you, then; refuse.”

“Nay, sire; I love De Bragelonne with my whole heart; he is smitten with
Mademoiselle de la Valliere, he weaves dreams of bliss for the future;
I am not one who is willing to destroy the illusions of youth. This
marriage is objectionable to me, but I implore your majesty to consent
to it forthwith, and thus make Raoul happy.”

“Tell me, comte, is she in love with him?”

“If your majesty requires me to speak candidly, I do not believe in
Mademoiselle de la Valliere’s affection; the delight at being at court,
the honor of being in the service of Madame, counteract in her head
whatever affection she may happen to have in her heart; it is a marriage
similar to many others which already exist at court; but De Bragelonne
wishes it, and so let it be.”

“And yet you do not resemble those easy-tempered fathers who volunteer
as stepping-stones for their children,” said the king.

“I am determined enough against the viciously disposed, but not so
against men of upright character. Raoul is suffering; he is in great
distress of mind; his disposition, naturally light and cheerful, has
become gloomy and melancholy. I do not wish to deprive your majesty of
the services he may be able to render.”

“I understand you,” said the king; “and what is more, I understand your
heart, too, comte.”

“There is no occasion, therefore,” replied the comte, “to tell your
majesty that my object is to make these children, or rather Raoul,
happy.”

“And I, too, as much as yourself, comte, wish to secure M. de
Bragelonne’s happiness.”

“I only await your majesty’s signature. Raoul will have the honor of
presenting himself before your majesty to receive your consent.”

“You are mistaken, comte,” said the king, firmly; “I have just said that
I desire to secure M. de Bragelonne’s happiness, and from the present
moment, therefore, I oppose his marriage.”

“But, sire,” exclaimed Athos, “your majesty has promised!”

“Not so, comte, I did not promise you, for it is opposed to my own
views.”

“I appreciate your majesty’s considerate and generous intentions on my
behalf; but I take the liberty of recalling to you that I undertook to
approach you as an ambassador.”

“An ambassador, comte, frequently asks, but does not always obtain what
he asks.”

“But, sire, it will be such a blow for De Bragelonne.”

“My hand shall deal the blow; I will speak to the vicomte.”

“Love, sire, is overwhelming in its might.”

“Love can be resisted, comte. I myself can assure you of that.”

“When one has the soul of a king,--your own, for instance, sire.”

“Do not make yourself uneasy on the subject. I have certain views for
De Bragelonne. I do not say that he shall not marry Mademoiselle de la
Valliere, but I do not wish him to marry so young; I do not wish him to
marry her until she has acquired a fortune; and he, on his side, no less
deserves favor, such as I wish to confer upon him. In a word, comte, I
wish them to wait.”

“Yet once more, sire.”

“Comte, you told me you came here to request a favor.”

“Assuredly, sire.”

“Grant me one, then, instead; let us speak no longer upon this matter.
It is probable that, before long, war may be declared. I require men
about me who are unfettered. I should hesitate to send under fire a
married man, or a father of a family. I should hesitate also, on De
Bragelonne’s account, to endow with a fortune, without some sound reason
for it, a young girl, a perfect stranger; such an act would sow jealousy
amongst my nobility.” Athos bowed, and remained silent.

“Is that all you wished to ask me?” added Louis XIV.

“Absolutely all, sire; and I take my leave of your majesty. Is it,
however, necessary that I should inform Raoul?”

“Spare yourself the trouble and annoyance. Tell the vicomte that at my
_levee_ to-morrow morning I will speak to him. I shall expect you this
evening, comte, to join my card-table.”

“I am in traveling-costume, sire.”

“A day will come, I hope, when you will leave me no more. Before long,
comte, the monarchy will be established in such a manner as to enable me
to offer a worthy hospitality to men of your merit.”

“Provided, sire, a monarch reigns grandly in the hearts of his subjects,
the palace he inhabits matters little, since he is worshipped in
a temple.” With these words Athos left the cabinet, and found De
Bragelonne, who was awaiting him anxiously.

“Well, monsieur?” said the young man.

“The king, Raoul, is well intentioned towards us both; not, perhaps, in
the sense you suppose, but he is kind, and generously disposed to our
house.”

“You have bad news to communicate to me, monsieur,” said the young man,
turning very pale.

“The king himself will inform you to-morrow morning that it is not bad
news.”

“The king has not signed, however?”

“The king wishes himself to settle the terms of the contract, and he
desires to make it so grand that he requires time for consideration.
Throw the blame rather on your own impatience, than on the king’s good
feelings towards you.”

Raoul, in utter consternation, on account of his knowledge of the
count’s frankness as well as his diplomacy, remained plunged in dull and
gloomy stupor.

“Will you not go with me to my lodgings?” said Athos.

“I beg your pardon, monsieur; I will follow you,” he stammered out,
following Athos down the staircase.

“Since I am here,” said Athos, suddenly, “cannot I see M. d’Artagnan?”

“Shall I show you his apartments?” said De Bragelonne.

“Do so.”

“They are on the opposite staircase.”

They altered their course, but on reaching the landing of the grand
staircase, Raoul perceived a servant in the Comte de Guiche’s livery,
who ran towards him as soon as he heard his voice.

“What is it?” said Raoul.

“This note, monsieur. My master heard of your return and wrote to you
without delay; I have been looking for you for the last half-hour.”

Raoul approached Athos as he unsealed the letter, saying, “With your
permission, monsieur.”

“Certainly.”

“Dear Raoul,” wrote the Comte de Guiche, “I have an affair in hand which
requires immediate attention; I know you have returned; come to me as
soon as possible.”

Hardly had he finished reading it, when a servant in the livery of the
Duke of Buckingham, turning out of the gallery, recognized Raoul, and
approached him respectfully, saying, “From his Grace, monsieur.”

“Well, Raoul, as I see you are already as busy as a general of an army,
I shall leave you, and will find M. d’Artagnan myself.”

“You will excuse me, I trust,” said Raoul.

“Yes, yes, I excuse you; adieu, Raoul; you will find me at my apartments
until to-morrow; during the day I may set out for Blois, unless I have
orders to the contrary.”

“I shall present my respects to you to-morrow, monsieur.”

As soon as Athos had left, Raoul opened Buckingham’s letter.

“Monsieur de Bragelonne,” it ran, “You are, of all the Frenchmen I
have known, the one with whom I am most pleased; I am about to put your
friendship to the proof. I have received a certain message, written
in very good French. As I am an Englishman, I am afraid of not
comprehending it very clearly. The letter has a good name attached to
it, and that is all I can tell you. Will you be good enough to come and
see me? for I am told you have arrived from Blois.

“Your devoted

“VILLIERS, Duke of Buckingham.”


“I am going now to see your master,” said Raoul to De Guiche’s servant,
as he dismissed him; “and I shall be with the Duke of Buckingham in an
hour,” he added, dismissing with these words the duke’s messenger.



Chapter XIX. Sword-Thrusts in the Water.

Raoul, on betaking himself to De Guiche, found him conversing with De
Wardes and Manicamp. De Wardes, since the affair of the barricade,
had treated Raoul as a stranger; they behaved as if they were not
acquainted. As Raoul entered, De Guiche walked up to him; and Raoul,
as he grasped his friend’s hand, glanced rapidly at his two companions,
hoping to be able to read on their faces what was passing in their
minds. De Wardes was cold and impenetrable; Manicamp seemed absorbed in
the contemplation of some trimming to his dress. De Guiche led Raoul
to an adjoining cabinet, and made him sit down, saying, “How well you
look!”

“That is singular,” replied Raoul, “for I am far from being in good
spirits.”

“It is your case, then, Raoul, as it is my own,--our love affairs do not
progress.”

“So much the better, count, as far as _you_ are concerned; the worst
news would be good news.”

“In that case do not distress yourself, for, not only am I very unhappy,
but, what is more, I see others about me who are happy.”

“Really, I do not understand you,” replied Raoul; “explain yourself.”

“You will soon learn. I have tried, but in vain, to overcome the feeling
you saw dawn in me, increase, and take entire possession of me. I have
summoned all your advice and my own strength to my aid. I have well
weighed the unfortunate affair in which I have embarked; I have sounded
its depths; that it is an abyss, I am aware, but it matters little for
_I_ shall pursue my own course.”

“This is madness, De Guiche! you cannot advance another step without
risking your own ruin to-day, perhaps your life to-morrow.”

“Whatever may happen, I have done with reflections; listen.”

“And you hope to succeed; you believe that Madame will love you?”

“Raoul, I believe nothing; I hope, because hope exists in man, and never
abandons him until death.”

“But, admitting that you obtain the happiness you covet, even then, you
are more certainly lost than if you had failed in obtaining it.”

“I beseech you, Raoul, not to interrupt me any more; you could never
convince me, for I tell you beforehand, I do not wish to be convinced; I
have gone so far I cannot recede; I have suffered so much, death itself
would be a boon. I no longer love to madness, Raoul, I am being engulfed
by a whirlpool of jealousy.”

Raoul struck his hands together with an expression resembling anger.
“Well?” said he.

“Well or ill matters little. This is what I claim from you, my friend,
my almost brother. During the last three days Madame has been living in
a perfect intoxication of gayety. On the first day, I dared not look
at her; I hated her for not being as unhappy as myself. The next day I
could not bear her out of my sight; and she, Raoul--at least I thought
I remarked it--she looked at me, if not with pity, at least with
gentleness. But between her looks and mine, a shadow intervened;
another’s smile invited hers. Beside her horse another’s always gallops,
which is not mine; in her ear another’s caressing voice, not mine,
unceasingly vibrates. Raoul, for three days past my brain has been on
fire; flame, not blood, courses through my veins. That shadow must be
driven away, that smile must be quenched; that voice must be silenced.”

“You wish Monsieur’s death,” exclaimed Raoul.

“No, no, I am not jealous of the husband; I am jealous of the lover.”

“Of the lover?” said Raoul.

“Have you not observed it, you who were formerly so keen-sighted?”

“Are you jealous of the Duke of Buckingham?”

“To the very death.”

“Again jealous?”

“This time the affair will be easy to arrange between us; I have taken
the initiative, and have sent him a letter.”

“It was you, then, who wrote to him?”

“How do you know that?”

“I know it, because he told me so. Look at this;” and he handed De
Guiche the letter he had received nearly at the same moment as his own.
De Guiche read it eagerly, and said, “He is a brave man, and more than
that, a gallant man.”

“Most certainly the duke is a gallant man; I need not ask if you wrote
to him in a similar style.”

“He will show you my letter when you call on him on my behalf.”

“But that is almost out of the question.”

“What is?”

“That I shall call on him for that purpose.”

“Why so?”

“The duke consults me as you do.”

“I suppose you will give _me_ the preference! Listen to me, Raoul, I
wish you to tell his Grace--it is a very simple matter--that to-day,
to-morrow, the following day, or any other day he may choose, I will
meet him at Vincennes.”

“Reflect, De Guiche.”

“I thought I told you I have reflected.”

“The duke is a stranger here; he is on a mission which renders his
person inviolable.... Vincennes is close to the Bastile.”

“The consequences concern _me_.”

“But the motive for this meeting? What motive do you wish me to assign?”

“Be perfectly easy on that score, he will not ask any. The duke must be
as sick of me as I am of him. I implore you, therefore, seek the duke,
and if it is necessary to entreat him, to accept my offer, I will do
so.”

“That is useless. The duke has already informed me that he wishes to
speak to me. The duke is now playing cards with the king. Let us both go
there. I will draw him aside in the gallery; you will remain aloof. Two
words will be sufficient.”

“That is well arranged. I will take De Wardes to keep me in
countenance.”

“Why not Manicamp? De Wardes can join us at any time; we can leave him
here.”

“Yes, that is true.”

“He knows nothing?”

“Positively nothing. You continue still on an unfriendly footing, then?”

“Has he not told you anything?”

“Nothing.”

“I do not like the man, and, as I _never_ liked him, the result is, that
I am on no worse terms with him to-day than I was yesterday.”

“Let us go, then.”

The four descended the stairs. De Guiche’s carriage was waiting at the
door, and took them to the Palais Royal. As they were going along, Raoul
was engaged in devising his scheme of action. The sole depositary of two
secrets, he did not despair of concluding some arrangement between the
two parties. He knew the influence he exercised over Buckingham, and
the ascendency he had acquired over De Guiche, and affairs did not look
utterly hopeless. On their arrival in the gallery, dazzling with the
blaze of light, where the most beautiful and illustrious women of the
court moved to and fro, like stars in their own atmosphere, Raoul could
not prevent himself for a moment forgetting De Guiche in order to
seek out Louise, who, amidst her companions, like a dove completely
fascinated, gazed long and fixedly upon the royal circle, which
glittered with jewels and gold. All its members were standing, the king
alone being seated. Raoul perceived Buckingham, who was standing a few
paces from Monsieur, in a group of French and English, who were admiring
his aristocratic carriage and the incomparable magnificence of his
costume. Some of the older courtiers remembered having seen his father,
but their recollections were not prejudicial to the son.

Buckingham was conversing with Fouquet, who was talking with him aloud
about Belle-Isle. “I cannot speak to him at present,” said Raoul.

“Wait, then, and choose your opportunity, but finish everything
speedily. I am on thorns.”

“See, our deliverer approaches,” said Raoul, perceiving D’Artagnan, who,
magnificently dressed in his new uniform of captain of the musketeers,
had just made his entry in the gallery; and he advanced towards
D’Artagnan.

“The Comte de la Fere has been looking for you, chevalier,” said Raoul.

“Yes,” replied D’Artagnan, “I have just left him.”

“I thought you would have passed a portion of the evening together.”

“We have arranged to meet again.”

As he answered Raoul, his absent looks were directed on all sides, as
if seeking some one in the crowd or looking for something in the room.
Suddenly his gaze became fixed, like that of an eagle on its prey. Raoul
followed the direction of his glance, and noticed that De Guiche and
D’Artagnan saluted each other, but he could not distinguish at whom the
captain’s lingering and haughty glance was aimed.

“Chevalier,” said Raoul, “there is no one here but yourself who can
render me a service.”

“What is it, my dear vicomte?”

“It is simply to go and interrupt the Duke of Buckingham, to whom I wish
to say two words, and, as the duke is conversing with M. Fouquet, you
understand that it would not do for _me_ to throw myself into the middle
of the conversation.”

“Ah, ah, is M. Fouquet there?” inquired D’Artagnan.

“Do you not see him?”

“Yes, now I do. But do you think I have a greater right than you have?”

“You are a more important personage.”

“Yes, you’re right; I am captain of the musketeers; I have had the post
promised me so long, and have enjoyed it for so brief a period, that I
am always forgetting my dignity.”

“You will do me this service, will you not?”

“M. Fouquet--the deuce!”

“Are you not on good terms with him?”

“It is rather he who may not be on good terms with me; however, since it
must be done some day or another--”

“Stay; I think he is looking at you; or is it likely that it might be--”

“No, no; don’t deceive yourself, it is indeed me for whom this honor is
intended.”

“The opportunity is a good one, then?”

“Do you think so?”

“Pray go.”

“Well, I will.”

De Guiche had not removed his eyes from Raoul, who made a sign to him
that all was arranged. D’Artagnan walked straight up to the group, and
civilly saluted M. Fouquet as well as the others.

“Good evening, M. d’Artagnan; we were speaking of Belle-Isle,” said
Fouquet, with that usage of society, and that perfect knowledge of the
language of looks, which require half a lifetime thoroughly to acquire,
and which some persons, notwithstanding all their study, never attain.

“Of Belle-Ile-en-Mer! Ah!” said D’Artagnan. “It belongs to you, I
believe, M. Fouquet?”

“M. Fouquet has just told us that he had presented it to the king,” said
Buckingham.

“Do you know Belle-Isle, chevalier?” inquired Fouquet.

“I have only been there once,” replied D’Artagnan, with readiness and
good-humor.

“Did you remain there long?”

“Scarcely a day.”

“Did you see much of it while you were there?”

“All that could be seen in a day.”

“A great deal can be seen with observation as keen as yours,” said
Fouquet; at which D’Artagnan bowed.

During this Raoul made a sign to Buckingham. “M. Fouquet,” said
Buckingham, “I leave the captain with you, he is more learned than I
am in bastions, scarps, and counter-scarps, and I will join one of my
friends, who has just beckoned me.” Saying this, Buckingham disengaged
himself from the group, and advanced towards Raoul, stopping for a
moment at the table where the queen-mother, the young queen, and the
king were playing together.

“Now, Raoul,” said De Guiche, “there he is; be firm and quick.”

Buckingham, having made some complimentary remark to Madame, continued
his way towards Raoul, who advanced to meet him, while De Guiche
remained in his place, though he followed him with his eyes. The
maneuver was so arranged that the young men met in an open space which
was left vacant, between the groups of players and the gallery, where
they walked, stopping now and then for the purpose of saying a few words
to some of the graver courtiers who were walking there. At the moment
when the two lines were about to unite, they were broken by a third. It
was Monsieur who advanced towards the Duke of Buckingham. Monsieur had
his most engaging smile on his red and perfumed lips.

“My dear duke,” said he, with the most affectionate politeness; “is it
really true what I have just been told?”

Buckingham turned round; he had not noticed Monsieur approach; but had
merely heard his voice. He started in spite of his command over himself,
and a slight pallor overspread his face. “Monseigneur,” he asked, “what
has been told you that surprises you so much?”

“That which throws me into despair, and will, in truth, be a real cause
of mourning for the whole court.”

“Your highness is very kind, for I perceive that you allude to my
departure.”

“Precisely.”

Guiche had overheard the conversation from where he was standing, and
started in his turn. “His departure,” he murmured. “What does he say?”

Philip continued with the same gracious air, “I can easily conceive,
monsieur, why the king of Great Britain recalls you; we all know that
King Charles II., who appreciates true gentlemen, cannot dispense with
you. But it cannot be supposed we can let you go without great regret;
and I beg you to receive the expression of my own.”

“Believe me, monseigneur,” said the duke, “that if I quit the court of
France--”

“Because you are recalled; but, if you suppose the expression of my own
wish on the subject might possibly have any influence with the king, I
will gladly volunteer to entreat his majesty Charles II. to leave you
with us a little while longer.”

“I am overwhelmed, monseigneur, by so much kindness,” replied
Buckingham; “but I have received positive commands. My residence in
France was limited; I have prolonged it at the risk of displeasing my
gracious sovereign. It is only this very day that I recollected I ought
to have set off four days ago.”

“Indeed,” said Monsieur.

“Yes; but,” added Buckingham, raising his voice in such a manner that
the princess could hear him,--“but I resemble that dweller in the East,
who turned mad, and remained so for several days, owing to a delightful
dream that he had had, but who one day awoke, if not completely
cured, in some respects rational at least. The court of France has its
intoxicating properties, which are not unlike this dream, my lord; but
at last I wake and leave it. I shall be unable, therefore, to prolong my
residence, as your highness has so kindly invited me to do.”

“When do you leave?” inquired Philip, with an expression full of
interest.

“To-morrow, monseigneur. My carriages have been ready for three days.”

The Duc d’Orleans made a movement of the head, which seemed to
signify, “Since you are determined, duke, there is nothing to be said.”
 Buckingham returned the gesture, concealing under a smile a contraction
of his heart; and then Monsieur moved away in the same direction by
which he had approached. At the same moment, however, De Guiche advanced
from the opposite direction. Raoul feared that the impatient young man
might possibly make the proposition himself, and hurried forth before
him.

“No, no, Raoul, all is useless now,” said Guiche, holding both his hands
towards the duke, and leading him behind a column. “Forgive me, duke,
for what I wrote to you, I was mad; give me back my letter.”

“It is true,” said the duke, “you cannot owe me a grudge any longer
now.”

“Forgive me, duke; my friendship, my lasting friendship is yours.”

“There is certainly no reason why you should bear me any ill-will from
the moment I leave her never to see her again.”

Raoul heard these words, and comprehending that his presence was now
useless between the young men, who had now only friendly words to
exchange, withdrew a few paces; a movement which brought him closer to
De Wardes, who was conversing with the Chevalier de Lorraine respecting
the departure of Buckingham. “A strategic retreat,” said De Wardes.

“Why so?”

“Because the dear duke saves a sword-thrust by it.” At which reply both
laughed.

Raoul, indignant, turned round frowningly, flushed with anger and his
lip curling with disdain. The Chevalier de Lorraine turned on his heel,
but De Wardes remained and waited.

“You will not break yourself of the habit,” said Raoul to De Wardes, “of
insulting the absent; yesterday it was M. d’Artagnan, to-day it is the
Duke of Buckingham.”

“You know very well, monsieur,” returned De Wardes, “that I sometimes
insult those who are present.”

De Wardes was close to Raoul, their shoulders met, their faces
approached, as if to mutually inflame each other by the fire of their
looks and of their anger. It could be seen that the one was at the
height of fury, the other at the end of his patience. Suddenly a voice
was heard behind them full of grace and courtesy, saying, “I believe I
heard my name pronounced.”

They turned round and saw D’Artagnan, who, with a smiling eye and a
cheerful face, had just placed his hand on De Wardes’s shoulder. Raoul
stepped back to make room for the musketeer. De Wardes trembled from
head to foot, turned pale, but did not move. D’Artagnan, still with the
same smile, took the place which Raoul had abandoned to him.

“Thank you, my dear Raoul,” he said. “M. de Wardes, I wish to talk with
you. Do not leave us, Raoul; every one can hear what I have to say to M.
de Wardes.” His smile immediately faded away, and his glace became cold
and sharp as a sword.

“I am at your orders, monsieur,” said De Wardes.

“For a very long time,” resumed D’Artagnan, “I have sought an
opportunity of conversing with you; to-day is the first time I have
found it. The place is badly chosen, I admit, but you will perhaps
have the goodness to accompany me to my apartments, which are on the
staircase at the end of this gallery.”

“I follow you, monsieur,” said De Wardes.

“Are you alone here?” said D’Artagnan.

“No; I have M. Manicamp and M. de Guiche, two of my friends.”

“That’s well,” said D’Artagnan; “but two persons are not sufficient; you
will be able to find a few others, I trust.”

“Certainly,” said the young man, who did not know what object D’Artagnan
had in view. “As many as you please.”

“Are they friends?”

“Yes, monsieur.”

“Real friends?”

“No doubt of it.”

“Very well, get a good supply, then. Do you come, too, Raoul; bring M.
de Guiche and the Duke of Buckingham.”

“What a disturbance,” replied De Wardes, attempting to smile. The
captain slightly signed to him with his hand, as though to recommend him
to be patient, and then led the way to his apartments. [2]



Chapter XX. Sword-Thrusts in the Water (concluded).

D’Artagnan’s apartment was not unoccupied; for the Comte de la Fere,
seated in the recess of a window, awaited him. “Well,” said he to
D’Artagnan, as he saw him enter.

“Well,” said the latter, “M. de Wardes has done me the honor to pay me a
visit, in company with some of his own friends, as well as of ours.” In
fact, behind the musketeer appeared De Wardes and Manicamp, followed
by De Guiche and Buckingham, who looked surprised, not knowing what was
expected of them. Raoul was accompanied by two or three gentlemen; and,
as he entered, glanced round the room, and perceiving the count, he went
and placed himself by his side. D’Artagnan received his visitors
with all the courtesy he was capable of; he preserved his unmoved and
unconcerned look. All the persons present were men of distinction,
occupying posts of honor and credit at the court. After he had
apologized to each of them for any inconvenience he might have put
them to, he turned towards De Wardes, who, in spite of his customary
self-command, could not prevent his face betraying some surprise mingled
with not a little uneasiness.

“Now, monsieur,” said D’Artagnan, “since we are no longer within the
precincts of the king’s palace, and since we can speak out without
failing in respect to propriety, I will inform you why I have taken the
liberty to request you to visit me here, and why I have invited these
gentlemen to be present at the same time. My friend, the Comte de la
Fere, has acquainted me with the injurious reports you are spreading
about myself. You have stated that you regard me as your mortal enemy,
because I was, so you affirm, that of your father.”

“Perfectly true, monsieur, I have said so,” replied De Wardes, whose
pallid face became slightly tinged with color.

“You accuse me, therefore, of a crime, or a fault, or of some mean
and cowardly act. Have the goodness to state your charge against me in
precise terms.”

“In the presence of witnesses?”

“Most certainly in the presence of witnesses; and you see I have
selected them as being experienced in affairs of honor.”

“You do not appreciate my delicacy, monsieur. I have accused you, it is
true; but I have kept the nature of the accusation a perfect secret.
I entered into no details; but have rested satisfied by expressing my
hatred in the presence of those on whom a duty was almost imposed to
acquaint you with it. You have not taken the discreetness I have shown
into consideration, although you were interested in remaining silent. I
can hardly recognize your habitual prudence in that, M. d’Artagnan.”

D’Artagnan, who was quietly biting the corner of his moustache, said,
“I have already had the honor to beg you to state the particulars of the
grievances you say you have against me.”

“Aloud?”

“Certainly, aloud.”

“In that case, I will speak.”

“Speak, monsieur,” said D’Artagnan, bowing; “we are all listening to
you.”

“Well, monsieur, it is not a question of a personal injury towards
myself, but one towards my father.”

“That you have already stated.”

“Yes; but there are certain subjects which are only approached with
hesitation.”

“If that hesitation, in your case, really does exist, I entreat you to
overcome it.”

“Even if it refer to a disgraceful action?”

“Yes; in every and any case.”

Those who were present at this scene had, at first, looked at each other
with a good deal of uneasiness. They were reassured, however, when they
saw that D’Artagnan manifested no emotion whatever.

De Wardes still maintained the same unbroken silence. “Speak, monsieur,”
 said the musketeer; “you see you are keeping us waiting.”

“Listen, then:--My father loved a lady of noble birth, and this lady
loved my father.” D’Artagnan and Athos exchanged looks. De Wardes
continued: “M. d’Artagnan found some letters which indicated a
rendezvous, substituted himself, under disguise, for the person who was
expected, and took advantage of the darkness.”

“That is perfectly true,” said D’Artagnan.

A slight murmur was heard from those present. “Yes, I was guilty of that
dishonorable action. You should have added, monsieur, since you are so
impartial, that, at the period when the circumstance which you have just
related happened, I was not one-and-twenty years of age.”

A renewed murmur was heard, but this time of astonishment, and almost of
doubt.

“It was a most shameful deception, I admit,” said D’Artagnan, “and I
have not waited for M. de Wardes’s reproaches to reproach myself for it,
and very bitterly, too. Age has, however, made me more reasonable, and,
above all, more upright; and this injury has been atoned for by a long
and lasting regret. But I appeal to you, gentlemen; this affair took
place in 1626, at a period, happily for yourselves, known to you by
tradition only, at a period when love was not over-scrupulous,
when consciences did not distill, as in the present day, poison and
bitterness. We were young soldiers, always fighting, or being attacked,
our swords always in our hands, or at least ready to be drawn from their
sheaths. Death then always stared us in the face, war hardened us, and
the cardinal pressed us sorely. I have repented of it, and more than
that--I still repent it, M. de Wardes.”

“I can well understand that, monsieur, for the action itself needed
repentance; but you were not the less the cause of that lady’s disgrace.
She, of whom you have been speaking, covered with shame, borne down by
the affront you brought upon her, fled, quitted France, and no one ever
knew what became of her.”

“Stay,” said the Comte de la Fere, stretching his hand towards De
Wardes, with a peculiar smile upon his face, “you are mistaken; she was
seen; and there are persons even now present, who, having often heard
her spoken of, will easily recognize her by the description I am about
to give. She was about five-and-twenty years of age, slender in form, of
a pale complexion, and fair-haired; she was married in England.”

“Married?” exclaimed De Wardes.

“So, you were not aware she was married? You see we are far better
informed than yourself. Do you happen to know she was usually styled ‘My
Lady,’ without the addition of any name to that description?”

“Yes, I know that.”

“Good Heavens!” murmured Buckingham.

“Very well, monsieur. That woman, who came from England, returned to
England after having thrice attempted M. d’Artagnan’s life. That was but
just, you will say, since M. d’Artagnan had insulted her. But that which
was not just was, that, when in England, this woman, by her seductions,
completely enslaved a young man in the service of Lord de Winter, by
name Felton. You change color, my lord,” said Athos, turning to the Duke
of Buckingham, “and your eyes kindle with anger and sorrow. Let your
Grace finish the recital, then, and tell M. de Wardes who this woman was
who placed the knife in the hand of your father’s murderer.”

A cry escaped from the lips of all present. The young duke passed his
handkerchief across his forehead, which was covered with perspiration. A
dead silence ensued among the spectators.

“You see, M. de Wardes,” said D’Artagnan, whom this recital had
impressed more and more, as his own recollection revived as Athos spoke,
“you see that my crime did not cause the destruction of any one’s soul,
and that the soul in question may fairly be considered to have been
altogether lost before my regret. It is, however, an act of conscience
on my part. Now this matter is settled, therefore, it remains for me
to ask, with the greatest humility, your forgiveness for this shameless
action, as most certainly I should have asked it of your father, if
he were still alive, and if I had met him after my return to France,
subsequent to the death of King Charles I.”

“That is too much, M. d’Artagnan,” exclaimed many voices, with
animation.

“No, gentlemen,” said the captain. “And now, M. de Wardes, I hope all is
finished between us, and that you will have no further occasion to speak
ill of me again. Do you consider it completely settled?”

De Wardes bowed, and muttered to himself inarticulately.

“I trust also,” said D’Artagnan, approaching the young man closely,
“that you will no longer speak ill of any one, as it seems you have the
unfortunate habit of doing; for a man so puritanically conscientious
as you are, who can reproach an old soldier for a youthful freak
five-and-thirty years after it happened, will allow me to ask whether
you, who advocate such excessive purity of conscience, will undertake on
your side to do nothing contrary either to conscience or the principle
of honor. And now, listen attentively to what I am going to say, M. de
Wardes, in conclusion. Take care that no tale, with which your name may
be associated, reaches my ear.”

“Monsieur,” said De Wardes, “it is useless threatening to no purpose.”

“I have not yet finished, M. de Wardes, and you must listen to me still
further.” The circle of listeners, full of eager curiosity, drew closer.
“You spoke just now of the honor of a woman, and of the honor of
your father. We were glad to hear you speak in that manner; for it is
pleasing to think that such a sentiment of delicacy and rectitude, and
which did not exist, it seems, in _our_ minds, lives in our children;
and it is delightful, too, to see a young man, at an age when men from
habit become the destroyers of the honor of women, respect and defend
it.”

De Wardes bit his lip and clenched his hands, evidently much disturbed
to learn how this discourse, the commencement of which was announced in
so threatening a manner, would terminate.

“How did it happen, then, that you allowed yourself to say to M. de
Bragelonne that he did not know who his mother was?”

Raoul’s eyes flashed, as, darting forward, he exclaimed,--“Chevalier,
this is a personal affair of my own!” At which exclamation, a smile,
full of malice, passed across De Wardes’s face.

D’Artagnan put Raoul aside, saying,--“Do not interrupt me, young man.”
 And looking at De Wardes in an authoritative manner, he continued:--“I
am now dealing with a matter which cannot be settled by means of the
sword. I discuss it before men of honor, all of whom have more than once
had their swords in their hands in affairs of honor. I selected them
expressly. These gentlemen well know that every secret for which men
fight ceases to be a secret. I again put my question to M. de Wardes.
What was the subject of conversation when you offended this young man,
in offending his father and mother at the same time?”

“It seems to me,” returned De Wardes, “that liberty of speech is
allowed, when it is supported by every means which a man of courage has
at his disposal.”

“Tell me what the means are by which a man of courage can sustain a
slanderous expression.”

“The sword.”

“You fail, not only in logic, in your argument, but in religion and
honor. You expose the lives of many others, without referring to your
own, which seems to be full of hazard. Besides, fashions pass away,
monsieur, and the fashion of duelling has passed away, without referring
in any way to the edicts of his majesty which forbid it. Therefore, in
order to be consistent with your own chivalrous notions, you will at
once apologize to M. de Bragelonne; you will tell him how much you
regret having spoken so lightly, and that the nobility and purity of
his race are inscribed, not in his heart alone, but still more in every
action of his life. You will do and say this, M. de Wardes, as I, an old
officer, did and said just now to your boy’s moustache.”

“And if I refuse?” inquired De Wardes.

“In that case the result will be--”

“That which you think you will prevent,” said De Wardes, laughing; “the
result will be that your conciliatory address will end in a violation of
the king’s prohibition.”

“Not so,” said the captain, “you are quite mistaken.”

“What will be the result, then?”

“The result will be that I shall go to the king, with whom I am on
tolerably good terms, to whom I have been happy enough to render certain
services, dating from a period when you were not born, and who, at
my request, has just sent me an order in blank for M. Baisemeaux de
Montlezun, governor of the Bastile; and I shall say to the king: ‘Sire,
a man has in a most cowardly way insulted M. de Bragelonne by insulting
his mother; I have written this man’s name upon the _lettre de cachet_
which your majesty has been kind enough to give me, so that M. de Wardes
is in the Bastile for three years.” And D’Artagnan, drawing the order
signed by the king from his pocket, held it towards De Wardes.

Remarking that the young man was not quite convinced, and received
the warning as an idle threat, he shrugged his shoulders and walked
leisurely towards the table, upon which lay a writing-case and a pen,
the length of which would have terrified the topographical Porthos. De
Wardes then saw that nothing could well be more seriously intended
than the threat in question, for the Bastile, even at that period, was
already held in dread. He advanced a step towards Raoul, and, in an
almost unintelligible voice, said,--“I offer my apologies in the terms
which M. d’Artagnan just now dictated, and which I am forced to make to
you.”

“One moment, monsieur,” said the musketeer, with the greatest
tranquillity, “you mistake the terms of the apology. I did not say, ‘and
which I am forced to make’; I said, ‘and which my conscience induces me
to make.’ This latter expression, believe me, is better than the former;
and it will be far preferable, since it will be the most truthful
expression of your own sentiments.”

“I subscribe to it,” said De Wardes; “but submit, gentlemen, that a
thrust of the sword through the body, as was the custom formerly, was
far better than tyranny like this.”

“No, monsieur,” replied Buckingham; “for the sword-thrust, when
received, was no indication that a particular person was right or wrong;
it only showed that he was more or less skillful in the use of the
weapon.”

“Monsieur!” exclaimed De Wardes.

“There, now,” interrupted D’Artagnan, “you are going to say something
very rude, and I am rendering a service by stopping you in time.”

“Is that all, monsieur?” inquired De Wardes.

“Absolutely everything,” replied D’Artagnan; “and these gentlemen, as
well as myself, are quite satisfied with you.”

“Believe me, monsieur, that your reconciliations are not successful.”

“In what way?”

“Because, as we are now about to separate, I would wager that M. de
Bragelonne and myself are greater enemies than ever.”

“You are deceived, monsieur, as far as I am concerned,” returned Raoul;
“for I do not retain the slightest animosity in my heart against you.”

This last blow overwhelmed De Wardes. He cast his eyes around him like
a man bewildered. D’Artagnan saluted most courteously the gentlemen who
had been present at the explanation; and every one, on leaving the room,
shook hands with him; but not one hand was held out towards De Wardes.
“Oh!” exclaimed the young man, “can I not find some one on whom to wreak
my vengeance?”

“You can, monsieur, for I am here,” whispered a voice full of menace in
his ear.

De Wardes turned round, and saw the Duke of Buckingham, who, having
probably remained behind with that intention, had just approached him.
“You, monsieur?” exclaimed De Wardes.

“Yes, I! I am no subject of the king of France; I am not going to remain
on the territory, since I am about setting off for England. I have
accumulated in my heart such a mass of despair and rage, that I, too,
like yourself, need to revenge myself upon some one. I approve M.
d’Artagnan’s principles profoundly, but I am not bound to apply them
to you. I am an Englishman, and, in my turn, I propose to you what you
proposed to others to no purpose. Since you, therefore, are so terribly
incensed, take me as a remedy. In thirty-four hours’ time I shall be at
Calais. Come with me; the journey will appear shorter if together, than
if alone. We will fight, when we get there, upon the sands which are
covered by the rising tide, and which form part of the French territory
during six hours of the day, but belong to the territory of Heaven
during the other six.”

“I accept willingly,” said De Wardes.

“I assure you,” said the duke, “that if you kill me, you will be
rendering me an infinite service.”

“I will do my utmost to make myself agreeable to you, duke,” said De
Wardes.

“It is agreed, then, that I carry you off with me?”

“I shall be at your commands. I needed some real danger and some mortal
risk to run, to tranquilize me.”

“In that case, I think you have met with what you are looking for.
Farewell, M. de Wardes; to-morrow morning, my valet will tell you the
exact hour of our departure; we can travel together like two excellent
friends. I generally travel as fast as I can. Adieu.”

Buckingham saluted De Wardes, and returned towards the king’s
apartments; De Wardes, irritated beyond measure, left the Palais Royal,
and hurried through the streets homeward to the house where he lodged.



Chapter XXI. Baisemeaux de Montlezun.

After the austere lesson administered to De Wardes, Athos and D’Artagnan
together descended the staircase which led to the courtyard of the
Palais Royal. “You perceive,” said Athos to D’Artagnan, “that Raoul
cannot, sooner or later, avoid a duel with De Wardes, for De Wardes is
as brave as he is vicious and wicked.”

“I know such fellows well,” replied D’Artagnan; “I had an affair with
the father. I assure you that, although at that time I had good muscles
and a sort of brute courage--I assure you that the father did me some
mischief. But you should have seen how I fought it out with him. Ah,
Athos, such encounters never take place in these times! I had a hand
which could never remain at rest, a hand like quicksilver,--you knew
its quality, for you have seen me at work. My sword was no longer than
a piece of steel; it was a serpent that assumed every form and every
length, seeking where it might thrust its head; in other words, where it
might fix its bite. I advanced half a dozen paces, then three, and then,
body to body, I pressed my antagonist closely, then I darted back again
ten paces. No human power could resist that ferocious ardor. Well,
De Wardes the father, with the bravery of his race, with his dogged
courage, occupied a good deal of my time; and my fingers, at the end of
the engagement, were, I well remember, tired enough.”

“It is, then, as I said,” resumed Athos, “the son will always be looking
out for Raoul, and will end by meeting him; and Raoul can easily be
found when he is sought for.”

“Agreed; but Raoul calculates well; he bears no grudge against De
Wardes,--he has said so; he will wait until he is provoked, and in that
case his position is a good one. The king will not be able to get out
of temper about the matter; besides we shall know how to pacify his
majesty. But why so full of these fears and anxieties? You don’t easily
get alarmed.”

“I will tell you what makes me anxious; Raoul is to see the king
to-morrow, when his majesty will inform him of his wishes respecting a
certain marriage. Raoul, loving as he does, will get out of temper, and
once in an angry mood, if he were to meet De Wardes, the shell would
explode.”

“We will prevent the explosion.”

“Not I,” said Athos, “for I must return to Blois. All this gilded
elegance of the court, all these intrigues, sicken me. I am no longer a
young man who can make terms with the meanness of the day. I have read
in the Great Book many things too beautiful and too comprehensive to
longer take any interest in the trifling phrases which these men whisper
among themselves when they wish to deceive others. In one word, I am
weary of Paris wherever and whenever you are not with me; and as I
cannot have you with me always, I wish to return to Blois.”

“How wrong you are, Athos; how you gainsay your origin and the destiny
of your noble nature. Men of your stamp are created to continue, to the
very last moment, in full possession of their great faculties. Look at
my sword, a Spanish blade, the one I wore at La Rochelle; it served me
for thirty years without fail; one day in the winter it fell upon the
marble floor on the Louvre and was broken. I had a hunting-knife made of
it which will last a hundred years yet. You, Athos, with your loyalty,
your frankness, your cool courage, and your sound information, are
the very man kings need to warn and direct them. Remain here; Monsieur
Fouquet will not last as long as my Spanish blade.”

“Is it possible,” said Athos, smiling, “that my friend, D’Artagnan, who,
after having raised me to the skies, making me an object of worship,
casts me down from the top of Olympus, and hurls me to the ground?
I have more exalted ambition, D’Artagnan. To be a minister--to be a
slave,--never! Am I not still greater? I am nothing. I remember having
heard you occasionally call me ‘the great Athos’; I defy you, therefore,
if I were minister, to continue to bestow that title upon me. No, no; I
do not yield myself in this manner.”

“We will not speak of it any more, then; renounce everything, even the
brotherly feeling which unites us.”

“It is almost cruel what you say.”

D’Artagnan pressed Athos’s hand warmly. “No, no; renounce everything
without fear. Raoul can get on without you. I am at Paris.”

“In that case I shall return to Blois. We will take leave of each other
to-night; to-morrow at daybreak I shall be on my horse again.”

“You cannot return to your hotel alone; why did you not bring Grimaud
with you?”

“Grimaud takes his rest now; he goes to bed early, for my poor old
servant gets easily fatigued. He came from Blois with me, and I
compelled him to remain within doors; for if, in retracing the forty
leagues which separate us from Blois, he needed to draw breath even, he
would die without a murmur. But I don’t want to lose Grimaud.”

“You shall have one of my musketeers to carry a torch for you. _Hola!_
some one there,” called out D’Artagnan, leaning over the gilded
balustrade. The heads of seven or eight musketeers appeared. “I wish
some gentleman, who is so disposed, to escort the Comte de la Fere,”
 cried D’Artagnan.

“Thank you for your readiness, gentlemen,” said Athos; “I regret to have
occasion to trouble you in this manner.”

“I would willingly escort the Comte de la Fere,” said some one, “if I
had not to speak to Monsieur d’Artagnan.”

“Who is that?” said D’Artagnan, looking into the darkness.

“I, Monsieur d’Artagnan.”

“Heaven forgive me, if that is not Monsieur Baisemeaux’s voice.”

“It is, monsieur.”

“What are you doing in the courtyard, my dear Baisemeaux?”

“I am waiting your orders, my dear Monsieur d’Artagnan.”

“Wretch that I am,” thought D’Artagnan; “true, you have been told,
I suppose, that some one was to be arrested, and have come yourself,
instead of sending an officer?”

“I came because I had occasion to speak to you.”

“You did not send to me?”

“I waited until you were disengaged,” said Monsieur Baisemeaux, timidly.

“I leave you, D’Artagnan,” said Athos.

“Not before I have present Monsieur Baisemeaux de Montlezun, the
governor of the Bastile.”

Baisemeaux and Athos saluted each other.

“Surely you must know each other,” said D’Artagnan.

“I have an indistinct recollection of Monsieur Baisemeaux,” said Athos.

“You remember, my dear, Baisemeaux, the king’s guardsman with whom we
used formerly to have such delightful meetings in the cardinal’s time?”

“Perfectly,” said Athos, taking leave of him with affability.

“Monsieur le Comte de la Fere, whose _nom de guerre_ was Athos,”
 whispered D’Artagnan to Baisemeaux.

“Yes, yes, a brave man, one of the celebrated four.”

“Precisely so. But, my dear Baisemeaux, shall we talk now?”

“If you please.”

“In the first place, as for the orders--there are none. The king does
not intend to arrest the person in question.

“So much the worse,” said Baisemeaux with a sigh.

“What do you mean by so much the worse?” exclaimed D’Artagnan, laughing.

“No doubt of it,” returned the governor, “my prisoners are my income.”

“I beg your pardon, I did not see it in that light.”

“And so there are no orders,” repeated Baisemeaux with a sigh. “What
an admirable situation yours is, captain,” he continued, after a pause;
“captain-lieutenant of the musketeers.”

“Oh, it is good enough; but I don’t see why you should envy me; you,
governor of the Bastile, the first castle in France.”

“I am well aware of that,” said Baisemeaux, in a sorrowful tone of
voice.

“You say that like a man confessing his sins. I would willingly exchange
my profits for yours.”

“Don’t speak of profits to me, if you wish to save me the bitterest
anguish of mind.”

“Why do you look first on one side and then on the other, as if you were
afraid of being arrested yourself, you whose business it is to arrest
others?”

“I was looking to see whether any one could see or listen to us; it
would be safer to confer more in private, if you would grant me such a
favor.”

“Baisemeaux, you seem to forget we are acquaintances of five and thirty
years’ standing. Don’t assume such sanctified airs; make yourself quite
comfortable; I don’t eat governors of the Bastile raw.”

“Heaven be praised!”

“Come into the courtyard with me; it’s a beautiful moonlit night; we
will walk up and down, arm in arm, under the trees, while you tell me
your pitiful tale.” He drew the doleful governor into the courtyard,
took him by the arm as he had said, and, in his rough, good-humored way,
cried: “Out with it, rattle away, Baisemeaux; what have you got to say?”

“It’s a long story.”

“You prefer your own lamentations, then; my opinion is, it will be
longer than ever. I’ll wager you are making fifty thousand francs out of
your pigeons in the Bastile.”

“Would to heaven that were the case, M. d’Artagnan.”

“You surprise me, Baisemeaux; just look at you, acting the anchorite.
I should like to show you your face in a glass, and you would see how
plump and florid-looking you are, as fat and round as a cheese, with
eyes like lighted coals; and if it were not for that ugly wrinkle you
try to cultivate on your forehead, you would hardly look fifty years
old, and you are sixty, if I am not mistaken.”

“All quite true.”

“Of course I knew it was true, as true as the fifty thousand francs
profit you make;” at which remark Baisemeaux stamped on the ground.

“Well, well,” said D’Artagnan, “I will add up your accounts for you: you
were captain of M. Mazarin’s guards; and twelve thousand francs a year
would in twelve years amount to one hundred and forty thousand francs.”

“Twelve thousand francs! Are you mad?” cried Baisemeaux; “the old miser
gave me no more than six thousand, and the expenses of the post amounted
to six thousand five hundred francs. M. Colbert, who deducted the other
six thousand francs, condescended to allow me to take fifty thousand
francs as a gratification; so that, if it were not for my little estate
at Montlezun, which brings me in twelve thousand francs a year, I could
not have met my engagements.”

“Well, then, how about the fifty thousand francs from the Bastile?
There, I trust, you are boarded and lodged, and get your six thousand
francs salary besides.”

“Admitted!”

“Whether the year be good or bad, there are fifty prisoners, who, on the
average, bring you in a thousand francs a year each.”

“I don’t deny it.”

“Well, there is at once an income of fifty thousand francs; you have
held the post three years, and must have received in that time one
hundred and fifty thousand francs.”

“You forget one circumstance, dear M. d’Artagnan.”

“What is that?”

“That while you received your appointment as captain from the king
himself, I received mine as governor from Messieurs Tremblay and
Louviere.”

“Quite right, and Tremblay was not a man to let you have the post for
nothing.”

“Nor Louviere either: the result was, that I gave seventy-five thousand
francs to Tremblay as his share.”

“Very agreeable that! and to Louviere?”

“The very same.”

“Money down?”

“No: that would have been impossible. The king did not wish, or rather
M. Mazarin did not wish, to have the appearance of removing those
two gentlemen, who had sprung from the barricades; he permitted them,
therefore, to make certain extravagant conditions for their retirement.”

“What were those conditions?”

“Tremble... three years’ income for the good-will.”

“The deuce! so that the one hundred and fifty thousand francs have
passed into their hands.”

“Precisely so.”

“And beyond that?”

“A sum of one hundred and fifty thousand francs, or fifteen thousand
pistoles, whichever you please, in three payments.”

“Exorbitant.”

“Yes, but that is not all.”

“What besides?”

“In default of the fulfillment by me of any one of those conditions,
those gentlemen enter upon their functions again. The king has been
induced to sign that.”

“It is monstrous, incredible!”

“Such is the fact, however.”

“I do indeed pity you, Baisemeaux. But why, in the name of fortune, did
M. Mazarin grant you this pretended favor? It would have been far better
to have refused you altogether.”

“Certainly, but he was strongly persuaded to do so by my protector.”

“Who is he?”

“One of your own friends, indeed; M. d’Herblay.”

“M. d’Herblay! Aramis!”

“Just so; he has been very kind towards me.”

“Kind! to make you enter into such a bargain!”

“Listen! I wished to leave the cardinal’s service. M. d’Herblay spoke on
my behalf to Louviere and Tremblay--they objected; I wished to have the
appointment very much, for I knew what it could be made to produce;
in my distress I confided in M. d’Herblay, and he offered to become my
surety for the different payments.”

“You astound me! Aramis became your surety?”

“Like a man of honor; he procured the signature; Tremblay and Louviere
resigned their appointments; I have paid every year twenty-five thousand
francs to these two gentlemen; on the thirty-first of May, every year,
M. d’Herblay himself comes to the Bastile, and brings me five thousand
pistoles to distribute between my crocodiles.”

“You owe Aramis one hundred and fifty thousand francs, then?”

“That is the very thing which is the cause of my despair, for I only owe
him one hundred thousand.”

“I don’t quite understand you.”

“He came and settled with the vampires only two years. To-day, however,
is the thirty-first of May, and he has not been yet, and to-morrow, at
midday, the payment falls due; if, therefore, I don’t pay to-morrow,
those gentlemen can, by the terms of the contract, break off the
bargain; I shall be stripped of everything; I shall have worked for
three years, and given two hundred and fifty thousand francs for
nothing, absolutely for nothing at all, dear M. d’Artagnan.”

“This is very strange,” murmured D’Artagnan.

“You can now imagine that I may well have wrinkles on my forehead, can
you not?”

“Yes, indeed!”

“And you can imagine, too, that notwithstanding I may be as round as a
cheese, with a complexion like an apple, and my eyes like coals on fire,
I may almost be afraid that I shall not have a cheese or an apple left
me to eat, and that my eyes will be left me only to weep with.”

“It is really a very grievous affair.”

“I have come to you, M. d’Artagnan, for you are the only man who can get
me out of my trouble.”

“In what way?”

“You are acquainted with the Abbe d’Herblay, and you know that he is a
somewhat mysterious gentleman.”

“Yes.”

“Well, you can, perhaps, give me the address of his presbytery, for I
have been to Noisy-le-Sec, and he is no longer there.”

“I should think not, indeed. He is Bishop of Vannes.”

“What! Vannes in Bretagne?”

“Yes.”

The little man began to tear his hair, saying, “How can I get to Vannes
from here by midday to-morrow? I am a lost man.”

“Your despair quite distresses me.”

“Vannes, Vannes!” cried Baisemeaux.

“But listen; a bishop is not always a resident. M. d’Herblay may not
possibly be so far away as you fear.”

“Pray tell me his address.”

“I really don’t know it.”

“In that case I am lost. I will go and throw myself at the king’s feet.”

“But, Baisemeaux, I can hardly believe what you tell me; besides, since
the Bastile is capable of producing fifty thousand francs a year, why
have you not tried to screw one hundred thousand out of it?”

“Because I am an honest man, M. d’Artagnan, and because my prisoners are
fed like ambassadors.”

“Well, you’re in a fair way to get out of your difficulties; give
yourself a good attack of indigestion with your excellent living, and
put yourself out of the way between this and midday to-morrow.”

“How can you be hard-hearted enough to laugh?”

“Nay, you really afflict me. Come, Baisemeaux, if you can pledge me your
word of honor, do so, that you will not open your lips to any one about
what I am going to say to you.”

“Never, never!”

“You wish to put your hands on Aramis?”

“At any cost!”

“Well, go and see where M. Fouquet is.”

“Why, what connection can there be--”

“How stupid you are! Don’t you know that Vannes is in the diocese of
Belle-Isle, or Belle-Isle in the diocese of Vannes? Belle-Isle belongs
to M. Fouquet, and M. Fouquet nominated M. d’Herblay to that bishopric!”

“I see, I see; you restore me to life again.”

“So much the better. Go and tell M. Fouquet very simply that you wish to
speak to M. d’Herblay.”

“Of course, of course,” exclaimed Baisemeaux, delightedly.

“But,” said D’Artagnan, checking him by a severe look, “your word of
honor?”

“I give you my sacred word of honor,” replied the little man, about to
set off running.

“Where are you going?”

“To M. Fouquet’s house.”

“It is useless doing that; M. Fouquet is playing at cards with the king.
All you can do is to pay M. Fouquet a visit early to-morrow morning.”

“I will do so. Thank you.”

“Good luck attend you,” said D’Artagnan.

“Thank you.”

“This is a strange affair,” murmured D’Artagnan, as he slowly ascended
the staircase after he had left Baisemeaux. “What possible interest can
Aramis have in obliging Baisemeaux in this manner? Well, I suppose we
shall learn some day or another.”



Chapter XXII. The King’s Card-Table.

Fouquet was present, as D’Artagnan had said, at the king’s card-table.
It seemed as if Buckingham’s departure had shed a balm on the lacerated
hearts of the previous evening. Monsieur, radiant with delight, made a
thousand affectionate signs to his mother. The Count de Guiche could not
separate himself from Buckingham, and while playing, conversed with him
upon the circumstance of his projected voyage. Buckingham, thoughtful,
and kind in his manner, like a man who has adopted a resolution,
listened to the count, and from time to time cast a look full of regret
and hopeless affection at Madame. The princess, in the midst of her
elation of spirits, divided her attention between the king, who was
playing with her, Monsieur, who quietly joked her about her enormous
winnings, and De Guiche, who exhibited an extravagant delight. Of
Buckingham she took but little notice; for her, this fugitive, this
exile, was now simply a remembrance, no longer a man. Light hearts are
thus constituted; while they themselves continue untouched, they roughly
break off with every one who may possibly interfere with their little
calculations of self comfort. Madame had received Buckingham’s smiles
and attentions and sighs while he was present; but what was the good
of sighing, smiling, and kneeling at a distance? Can one tell in what
direction the winds in the Channel, which toss mighty vessels to and
fro, carry such sighs as these? The duke could not fail to mark this
change, and his heart was cruelly hurt. Of a sensitive character, proud
and susceptible of deep attachment, he cursed the day on which such a
passion had entered his heart. The looks he cast, from time to time
at Madame, became colder by degrees at the chilling complexion of his
thoughts. He could hardly yet despair, but he was strong enough to
impose silence upon the tumultuous outcries of his heart. In exact
proportion, however, as Madame suspected this change of feeling, she
redoubled her activity to regain the ray of light she was about to lose;
her timid and indecisive mind was displayed in brilliant flashes of
wit and humor. At any cost she felt that she must be remarked above
everything and every one, even above the king himself. And she was so,
for the queens, notwithstanding their dignity, and the king, despite the
respect which etiquette required, were all eclipsed by her. The queens,
stately and ceremonious, were softened and could not restrain their
laughter. Madame Henriette, the queen-mother, was dazzled by the
brilliancy which cast distinction upon her family, thanks to the wit of
the grand-daughter of Henry IV. The king, jealous, as a young man and
as a monarch, of the superiority of those who surrounded him, could not
resist admitting himself vanquished by a petulance so thoroughly French
in its nature, whose energy more than ever increased by English humor.
Like a child, he was captivated by her radiant beauty, which her wit
made still more dazzling. Madame’s eyes flashed like lightning. Wit and
humor escaped from her scarlet lips like persuasion from the lips of
Nestor of old. The whole court, subdued by her enchanting grace,
noticed for the first time that laughter could be indulged in before the
greatest monarch in the world, like people who merited their appellation
of the wittiest and most polished people in Europe.

Madame, from that evening, achieved and enjoyed a success capable of
bewildering all not born to those altitudes termed thrones; which, in
spite of their elevation, are sheltered from such giddiness. From that
very moment Louis XIV. acknowledged Madame as a person to be recognized.
Buckingham regarded her as a coquette deserving the cruelest tortures,
and De Guiche looked upon her as a divinity; the courtiers as a star
whose light might some day become the focus of all favor and power. And
yet Louis XIV., a few years previously, had not even condescended to
offer his hand to that “ugly girl” for a ballet; and Buckingham had
worshipped this coquette “on both knees.” De Guiche had once looked upon
this divinity as a mere woman; and the courtiers had not dared to extol
this star in her upward progress, fearful to disgust the monarch whom
such a dull star had formerly displeased.

Let us see what was taking place during this memorable evening at the
king’s card-table. The young queen, although Spanish by birth, and the
niece of Anne of Austria, loved the king, and could not conceal her
affection. Anne of Austria, a keen observer, like all women, and
imperious, like every queen, was sensible of Madame’s power, and
acquiesced in it immediately, a circumstance which induced the young
queen to raise the siege and retire to her apartments. The king hardly
paid any attention to her departure, notwithstanding the pretended
symptoms of indisposition by which it was accompanied. Encouraged by the
rules of etiquette, which he had begun to introduce at the court as an
element of every relation of life, Louis XIV. did not disturb himself;
he offered his hand to Madame without looking at Monsieur his brother,
and led the young princess to the door of her apartments. It was
remarked, that at the threshold of the door, his majesty, freed from
every restraint, or not equal to the situation, sighed very deeply.
The ladies present--nothing escapes a woman’s glance--Mademoiselle
Montalais, for instance--did not fail to say to each other, “the king
sighed,” and “Madame sighed too.” This had been indeed the case. Madame
had sighed very noiselessly, but with an accompaniment very far more
dangerous for the king’s repose. Madame had sighed, first closing her
beautiful black eyes, next opening them, and then, laden, as they were,
with an indescribable mournfulness of expression, she had raised them
towards the king, whose face at that moment visibly heightened in color.
The consequence of these blushes, of those interchanged sighs, and of
this royal agitation, was, that Montalais had committed an indiscretion
which had certainly affected her companion, for Mademoiselle de la
Valliere, less clear sighted, perhaps, turned pale when the king
blushed; and her attendance being required upon Madame, she tremblingly
followed the princess without thinking of taking the gloves, which court
etiquette required her to do. True it is that the young country girl
might allege as her excuse the agitation into which the king seemed to
be thrown, for Mademoiselle de la Valliere, busily engaged in closing
the door, had involuntarily fixed her eyes upon the king, who, as he
retired backwards, had his face towards it. The king returned to the
room where the card-tables were set out. He wished to speak to the
different persons there, but it was easy to see that his mind was
absent. He jumbled different accounts together, which was taken
advantage of by some of the noblemen who had retained those habits since
the time of Monsieur Mazarin--who had a poor memory, but was a good
calculator. In this way, Monsieur Manicamp, with a thoughtless and
absent air--for M. Manicamp was the honestest man in the world,
appropriated twenty thousand francs, which were littering the table, and
which did not seem to belong to any person in particular. In the same
way, Monsieur de Wardes, whose head was doubtless a little bewildered by
the occurrences of the evening, somehow forgot to leave behind him the
sixty double louis which he had won for the Duke of Buckingham, and
which the duke, incapable, like his father, of soiling his hands with
coin of any sort, had left lying on the table before him. The king
only recovered his attention in some degree at the moment that Monsieur
Colbert, who had been narrowly observant for some minutes, approached,
and, doubtless, with great respect, yet with much perseverance,
whispered a counsel of some sort into the still tingling ears of the
king. The king, at the suggestion, listened with renewed attention and
immediately looking around him, said, “Is Monsieur Fouquet no longer
here?”

“Yes, sire, I am here,” replied the superintendent, till then engaged
with Buckingham, and approached the king, who advanced a step towards
him with a smiling yet negligent air. “Forgive me,” said Louis, “if I
interrupt your conversation; but I claim your attention wherever I may
require your services.”

“I am always at the king’s service,” replied Fouquet.

“And your cash-box, too,” said the king, laughing with a false smile.

“My cash-box more than anything else,” said Fouquet, coldly.

“The fact is, I wish to give a _fete_ at Fontainebleau--to keep open
house for fifteen days, and I shall require--” and he stopped, glancing
at Colbert. Fouquet waited without showing discomposure; and the king
resumed, answering Colbert’s icy smile, “four million francs.”

“Four million,” repeated Fouquet, bowing profoundly. And his nails,
buried in his bosom, were thrust into his flesh, but the tranquil
expression of his face remained unaltered. “When will they be required,
sire?”

“Take your time,--I mean--no, no; as soon as possible.”

“A certain time will be necessary, sire.”

“Time!” exclaimed Colbert, triumphantly.

“The time, monsieur,” said the superintendent, with the haughtiest
disdain, “simply to _count the money_; a million can only be drawn and
weighed in a day.”

“Four days, then,” said Colbert.

“My clerks,” replied Fouquet, addressing himself to the king, “will
perform wonders on his majesty’s service, and the sum shall be ready in
three days.”

It was for Colbert now to turn pale. Louis looked at him astonished.
Fouquet withdrew without any parade or weakness, smiling at his numerous
friends, in whose countenances alone he read the sincerity of their
friendship--an interest partaking of compassion. Fouquet, however,
should not be judged by his smile, for, in reality, he felt as if he had
been stricken by death. Drops of blood beneath his coat stained the fine
linen that clothed his chest. His dress concealed the blood, and his
smile the rage which devoured him. His domestics perceived, by the
manner in which he approached his carriage, that their master was not in
the best of humors: the result of their discernment was, that his orders
were executed with that exactitude of maneuver which is found on board
a man-of-war, commanded during a storm by an ill-tempered captain. The
carriage, therefore, did not simply roll along--it flew. Fouquet had
hardly time to recover himself during the drive; on his arrival he
went at once to Aramis, who had not yet retired for the night. As for
Porthos, he had supped very agreeably off a roast leg of mutton, two
pheasants, and a perfect heap of cray-fish; he then directed his body to
be anointed with perfumed oils, in the manner of the wrestlers of
old; and when this anointment was completed, he had himself wrapped in
flannels and placed in a warm bed. Aramis, as we have already said,
had not retired. Seated at his ease in a velvet dressing-gown, he wrote
letter after letter in that fine and hurried handwriting, a page of
which contained a quarter of a volume. The door was thrown hurriedly
open, and the superintendent appeared, pale, agitated, anxious. Aramis
looked up: “Good-evening,” said he; and his searching look detected his
host’s sadness and disordered state of mind. “Was your play as good as
his majesty’s?” asked Aramis, by way of beginning the conversation.

Fouquet threw himself upon a couch, and then pointed to the door to
the servant who had followed him; when the servant had left he said,
“Excellent.”

Aramis, who had followed every movement with his eyes, noticed that he
stretched himself upon the cushions with a sort of feverish impatience.
“You have lost as usual?” inquired Aramis, his pen still in his hand.

“Even more than usual,” replied Fouquet.

“You know how to support losses?”

“Sometimes.”

“What, Monsieur Fouquet a bad player!”

“There is play and play, Monsieur d’Herblay.”

“How much have you lost?” inquired Aramis, with a slight uneasiness.

Fouquet collected himself a moment, and then, without the slightest
emotion, said, “The evening has cost me four millions,” and a bitter
laugh drowned the last vibration of these words.

Aramis, who did not expect such an amount, dropped his pen. “Four
millions,” he said; “you have lost four millions,--impossible!”

“Monsieur Colbert held my cards for me,” replied the superintendent,
with a similar bitter laugh.

“Ah, now I understand; so, so, a new application for funds?”

“Yes, and from the king’s own lips. It was impossible to ruin a man with
a more charming smile. What do you think of it?”

“It is clear that your destruction is the object in view.”

“That is your opinion?”

“Still. Besides, there is nothing in it which should astonish you, for
we have foreseen it all along.”

“Yes; but I did not expect four millions.”

“No doubt the amount is serious, but, after all, four millions are
not quite the death of a man, especially when the man in question is
Monsieur Fouquet.”

“My dear D’Herblay, if you knew the contents of my coffers, you would be
less easy.”

“And you promised?”

“What could I _do?_”

“That’s true.”

“The very day I refuse, Colbert will procure the money; whence I know
not, but he _will_ procure it: and I shall be lost.”

“There is no doubt of that. In how many days did you promise the four
millions?”

“In three days. The king seemed exceedingly pressed.”

“_In three days?_”

“When I think,” resumed Fouquet, “that just now as I passed along the
streets, the people cried out, ‘There is the rich Monsieur Fouquet,’ it
is enough to turn my brain.”

“Stay, monsieur, the matter is not worth so much trouble,” said Aramis,
calmly, sprinkling some sand over the letter he had just written.

“Suggest a remedy, then, for this evil without a remedy.”

“There is only one remedy for you,--pay.”

“But it is very uncertain whether I have the money. Everything must be
exhausted; Belle-Isle is paid for; the pension has been paid; and money,
since the investigation of the accounts of those who farm the revenue,
is scarce. Besides, admitting that I pay this time, how can I do so on
another occasion? When kings have tasted money, they are like tigers who
have tasted flesh, they devour everything. The day will arrive--_must_
arrive--when I shall have to say, ‘Impossible, sire,’ and on that very
day I am a lost man.”

Aramis raised his shoulders slightly, saying:

“A man in your position, my lord, is only lost when he wishes to be so.”

“A man, whatever his position may be, cannot hope to struggle against a
king.”

“Nonsense; when I was young I wrestled successfully with the Cardinal
Richelieu, who was king of France,--nay more--cardinal.”

“Where are my armies, my troops, my treasures? I have not even
Belle-Isle.”

“Bah! necessity is the mother of invention, and when you think all is
lost, something will be discovered which will retrieve everything.”

“Who will discover this wonderful something?”

“Yourself.”

“I! I resign my office of inventor.”

“Then _I_ will.”

“Be it so. But set to work without delay.”

“Oh! we have time enough!”

“You kill me, D’Herblay, with your calmness,” said the superintendent,
passing his handkerchief over his face.

“Do you not remember that I one day told you not to make yourself
uneasy, if you possessed courage? _Have_ you any?”

“I believe so.”

“Then don’t make yourself uneasy.”

“It is decided then, that, at the last moment, you will come to my
assistance.”

“It will only be the repayment of a debt I owe you.”

“It is the vocation of financiers to anticipate the wants of men such as
yourself, D’Herblay.”

“If obligingness is the vocation of financiers, charity is the virtue
of the clergy. Only, on this occasion, do you act, monsieur. You are not
yet sufficiently reduced, and at the last moment we will see what is to
be done.”

“We shall see, then, in a very short time.”

“Very well. However, permit me to tell you that, personally, I regret
exceedingly that you are at present so short of money, because I myself
was about to ask you for some.”

“For yourself?”

“For myself, or some of my people, for mine or for ours.”

“How much do you want?”

“Be easy on that score; a roundish sum, it is true, but not too
exorbitant.”

“Tell me the amount.”

“Fifty thousand francs.”

“Oh! a mere nothing. Of course one has always fifty thousand francs.
Why the deuce cannot that knave Colbert be as easily satisfied as you
are--and I should give myself far less trouble than I do. When do you
need this sum?”

“To-morrow morning; but you wish to know its destination?”

“Nay, nay, chevalier, I need no explanation.”

“To-morrow is the first of June.”

“Well?”

“One of our bonds becomes due.”

“I did not know we had any bonds.”

“Certainly, to-morrow we pay our last third instalment.”

“What third?”

“Of the one hundred and fifty thousand francs to Baisemeaux.”

“Baisemeaux? Who is he?”

“The governor of the Bastile.”

“Yes, I remember. On what grounds am I to pay one hundred and fifty
thousand francs for that man.”

“On account of the appointment which he, or rather we, purchased from
Louviere and Tremblay.”

“I have a very vague recollection of the matter.”

“That is likely enough, for you have so many affairs to attend to.
However, I do not believe you have any affair in the world of greater
importance than this one.”

“Tell me, then, why we purchased this appointment.”

“Why, in order to render him a service in the first place, and
afterwards ourselves.”

“Ourselves? You are joking.”

“Monseigneur, the time may come when the governor of the Bastile may
prove a very excellent acquaintance.”

“I have not the good fortune to understand you, D’Herblay.”

“Monseigneur, we had our own poets, our own engineer, our own architect,
our own musicians, our own printer, and our own painters; we needed our
own governor of the Bastile.”

“Do you think so?”

“Let us not deceive ourselves, monseigneur; we are very much opposed to
paying the Bastile a visit,” added the prelate, displaying, beneath
his pale lips, teeth which were still the same beautiful teeth so much
admired thirty years previously by Marie Michon.

“And you think it is not too much to pay one hundred and fifty thousand
francs for that? I thought you generally put out money at better
interest than that.”

“The day will come when you will admit your mistake.”

“My dear D’Herblay, the very day on which a man enters the Bastile, he
is no longer protected by his past.”

“Yes, he is, if the bonds are perfectly regular; besides, that good
fellow Baisemeaux has not a courtier’s heart. I am certain, my lord,
that he will not remain ungrateful for that money, without taking into
account, I repeat, that I retain the acknowledgements.”

“It is a strange affair! usury in a matter of benevolence.”

“Do not mix yourself up with it, monseigneur; if there be usury, it is
I who practice it, and both of us reap the advantage from it--that is
all.”

“Some intrigue, D’Herblay?”

“I do not deny it.”

“And Baisemeaux an accomplice in it?”

“Why not?--there are worse accomplices than he. May I depend, then, upon
the five thousand pistoles to-morrow?”

“Do you want them this evening?”

“It would be better, for I wish to start early; poor Baisemeaux will not
be able to imagine what has be become of me, and must be upon thorns.”

“You shall have the amount in an hour. Ah, D’Herblay, the interest
of your one hundred and fifty thousand francs will never pay my four
millions for me.”

“Why not, monseigneur?”

“Good-night, I have business to transact with my clerks before I
retire.”

“A good night’s rest, monseigneur.”

“D’Herblay, you wish things that are impossible.”

“Shall I have my fifty thousand francs this evening?”

“Yes.”

“Go to sleep, then, in perfect safety--it is I who tell you to do so.”

Notwithstanding this assurance, and the tone in which it was given,
Fouquet left the room shaking his head, and heaving a sigh.



Chapter XXIII. M. Baisemeaux de Montlezun’s Accounts.

The clock of St. Paul was striking seven as Aramis, on horseback,
dressed as a simple citizen, that is to say, in colored suit, with no
distinctive mark about him, except a kind of hunting-knife by his side,
passed before the Rue du Petit-Musc, and stopped opposite the Rue des
Tournelles, at the gate of the Bastile. Two sentinels were on duty at
the gate; they made no difficulty about admitting Aramis, who entered
without dismounting, and they pointed out the way he was to go by a
long passage with buildings on both sides. This passage led to the
drawbridge, or, in other words, to the real entrance. The drawbridge was
down, and the duty of the day was about being entered upon. The sentinel
at the outer guardhouse stopped Aramis’s further progress, asking him,
in a rough tone of voice, what had brought him there. Aramis explained,
with his usual politeness, that a wish to speak to M. Baisemeaux de
Montlezun had occasioned his visit. The first sentinel then summoned a
second sentinel, stationed within an inner lodge, who showed his face
at the grating, and inspected the new arrival most attentively. Aramis
reiterated the expression of his wish to see the governor; whereupon the
sentinel called to an officer of lower grade, who was walking about in a
tolerably spacious courtyard and who, in turn, on being informed of his
object, ran to seek one of the officers of the governor’s staff. The
latter, after having listened to Aramis’s request, begged him to wait a
moment, then went away a short distance, but returned to ask his name.
“I cannot tell it you, monsieur,” said Aramis; “I need only mention that
I have matters of such importance to communicate to the governor, that
I can only rely beforehand upon one thing, that M. de Baisemeaux will be
delighted to see me; nay, more than that, when you have told him that it
is the person whom he expected on the first of June, I am convinced he
will hasten here himself.” The officer could not possibly believe that a
man of the governor’s importance should put himself out for a person of
so little importance as the citizen-looking visitor on horseback. “It
happens most fortunately, monsieur,” he said, “that the governor is just
going out, and you can perceive his carriage with the horses already
harnessed, in the courtyard yonder; there will be no occasion for him to
come to meet you, as he will see you as he passes by.” Aramis bowed to
signify his assent; he did not wish to inspire others with too exalted
an opinion of himself, and therefore waited patiently and in silence,
leaning upon the saddle-bow of his horse. Ten minutes had hardly elapsed
when the governor’s carriage was observed to move. The governor appeared
at the door, and got into the carriage, which immediately prepared to
start. The same ceremony was observed for the governor himself as with
a suspected stranger; the sentinel at the lodge advanced as the
carriage was about to pass under the arch, and the governor opened the
carriage-door, himself setting the example of obedience to orders;
so that, in this way, the sentinel could convince himself that no one
quitted the Bastile improperly. The carriage rolled along under the
archway, but at the moment the iron-gate was opened, the officer
approached the carriage, which had again been stopped, and said
something to the governor, who immediately put his head out of
the door-way, and perceived Aramis on horseback at the end of the
drawbridge. He immediately uttered almost a shout of delight, and got
out, or rather darted out of his carriage, running towards Aramis, whose
hands he seized, making a thousand apologies. He almost embraced him.
“What a difficult matter to enter the Bastile!” said Aramis. “Is it the
same for those who are sent here against their wills, as for those who
come of their own accord?”

“A thousand pardons, my lord. How delighted I am to see your Grace!”

“Hush! What are you thinking of, my dear M. Baisemeaux? What do you
suppose would be thought of a bishop in my present costume?”

“Pray, excuse me, I had forgotten. Take this gentleman’s horse to the
stables,” cried Baisemeaux.

“No, no,” said Aramis; “I have five thousand pistoles in the
saddle-bags.”

The governor’s countenance became so radiant, that if the prisoners had
seen him they would have imagined some prince of the royal blood had
arrived. “Yes, you are right, the horse shall be taken to the government
house. Will you get into the carriage, my dear M. d’Herblay? and it
shall take us back to my house.”

“Get into a carriage to cross a courtyard! do you believe I am so great
an invalid? No, no, we will go on foot.”

Baisemeaux then offered his arm as a support, but the prelate did
not accept it. They arrived in this manner at the government house,
Baisemeaux rubbing his hands and glancing at the horse from time to
time, while Aramis was looking at the bleak bare walls. A tolerably
handsome vestibule and a staircase of white stone led to the governor’s
apartments, who crossed the ante-chamber, the dining-room, where
breakfast was being prepared, opened a small side door, and closeted
himself with his guest in a large cabinet, the windows of which opened
obliquely upon the courtyard and the stables. Baisemeaux installed the
prelate with that all-inclusive politeness of which a good man, or a
grateful man, alone possesses the secret. An arm-chair, a footstool,
a small table beside him, on which to rest his hand, everything was
prepared by the governor himself. With his own hands, too, he placed
upon the table, with much solicitude, the bag containing the gold, which
one of the soldiers had brought up with the most respectful devotion;
and the soldier having left the room, Baisemeaux himself closed the door
after him, drew aside one of the window-curtains, and looked steadfastly
at Aramis to see if the prelate required anything further.

“Well, my lord,” he said, still standing up, “of all men of their word,
you still continue to be the most punctual.”

“In matters of business, dear M. de Baisemeaux, exactitude is not a
virtue only, it is a duty as well.”

“Yes, in matters of business, certainly; but what you have with me is
not of that character; it is a service you are rendering me.”

“Come, confess, dear M. de Baisemeaux, that, notwithstanding this
exactitude, you have not been without a little uneasiness.”

“About your health, I certainly have,” stammered out Baisemeaux.

“I wished to come here yesterday, but I was not able, as I was too
fatigued,” continued Aramis. Baisemeaux anxiously slipped another
cushion behind his guest’s back. “But,” continued Aramis, “I promised
myself to come and pay you a visit to-day, early in the morning.”

“You are really very kind, my lord.”

“And it was a good thing for me I was punctual, I think.”

“What do you mean?”

“Yes, you were going out.” At which latter remark Baisemeaux colored and
said, “It is true I was going out.”

“Then I prevent you,” said Aramis; whereupon the embarrassment of
Baisemeaux became visibly greater. “I am putting you to inconvenience,”
 he continued, fixing a keen glace upon the poor governor; “if I had
known that, I should not have come.”

“How can your lordship imagine that you could ever inconvenience me?”

“Confess you were going in search of money.”

“No,” stammered out Baisemeaux, “no! I assure you I was going to--”

“Does the governor still intend to go to M. Fouquet?” suddenly called
out the major from below. Baisemeaux ran to the window like a madman.
“No, no,” he exclaimed in a state of desperation, “who the deuce is
speaking of M. Fouquet? are you drunk below there? why am I interrupted
when I am engaged on business?”

“You were going to M. Fouquet’s,” said Aramis, biting his lips, “to M.
Fouquet, the abbe, or the superintendent?”

Baisemeaux almost made up his mind to tell an untruth, but he could not
summon courage to do so. “To the superintendent,” he said.

“It is true, then, that you were in want of money, since you were going
to a person who gives it away!”

“I assure you, my lord--”

“You were afraid?”

“My dear lord, it was the uncertainty and ignorance in which I was as to
where you were to be found.”

“You would have found the money you require at M. Fouquet’s, for he is a
man whose hand is always open.”

“I swear that I should never have ventured to ask M. Fouquet for money.
I only wished to ask him for your address.”

“To ask M. Fouquet for my address?” exclaimed Aramis, opening his eyes
in real astonishment.

“Yes,” said Baisemeaux, greatly disturbed by the glance which the
prelate fixed upon him,--“at M. Fouquet’s certainly.”

“There is no harm in that, dear M. Baisemeaux, only I would ask, why ask
my address of M. Fouquet?”

“That I might write to you.”

“I understand,” said Aramis smiling, “but that is not what I meant; I do
not ask you what you required my address for: I only ask why you should
go to M. Fouquet for it?”

“Oh!” said Baisemeaux, “as Belle-Isle is the property of M. Fouquet,
and as Belle-Isle is in the diocese of Vannes, and as you are bishop of
Vannes--”

“But, my dear Baisemeaux, since you knew I was bishop of Vannes, you had
no occasion to ask M. Fouquet for my address.”

“Well, monsieur,” said Baisemeaux, completely at bay, “if I have acted
indiscreetly, I beg your pardon most sincerely.”

“Nonsense,” observed Aramis calmly: “how can you possibly have acted
indiscreetly?” And while he composed his face, and continued to smile
cheerfully on the governor, he was considering how Baisemeaux, who was
not aware of his address, knew, however, that Vannes was his residence.
“I shall clear all this up,” he said to himself; and then speaking
aloud, added,--“Well, my dear governor shall we now arrange our little
accounts?”

“I am at your orders, my lord; but tell me beforehand, my lord, whether
you will do me the honor to breakfast with me as usual?”

“Very willingly, indeed.”

“That’s well,” said Baisemeaux, as he struck the bell before him three
times.

“What does that mean?” inquired Aramis.

“That I have some one to breakfast with me, and that preparations are to
be made accordingly.”

“And you rang thrice. Really, my dear governor, I begin to think you are
acting ceremoniously with me.”

“No, indeed. Besides, the least I can do is to receive you in the best
way I can.”

“But why so?”

“Because not even a prince could have done what you have done for me.”

“Nonsense! nonsense!”

“Nay, I assure you--”

“Let us speak of other matters,” said Aramis. “Or rather, tell me how
your affairs here are getting on.”

“Not over well.”

“The deuce!”

“M. de Mazarin was not hard enough.”

“Yes, I see; you require a government full of suspicion--like that of
the old cardinal, for instance.”

“Yes; matters went on better under him. The brother of his ‘gray
eminence’ made his fortune here.”

“Believe me, my dear governor,” said Aramis, drawing closer to
Baisemeaux, “a young king is well worth an old cardinal. Youth has
its suspicions, its fits of anger, its prejudices, as old age has its
hatreds, its precautions, and its fears. Have you paid your three years’
profits to Louvidre and Tremblay?”

“Most certainly I have.”

“So that you have nothing more to give them than the fifty thousand
francs I have brought with me?”

“Nothing.”

“Have you not saved anything, then?”

“My lord, in giving the fifty thousand francs of my own to these
gentlemen, I assure you that I gave them everything I gain. I told M.
d’Artagnan so yesterday evening.”

“Ah!” said Aramis, whose eyes sparkled for a moment, but became
immediately afterwards as unmoved as before; “so you have been to see my
old friend D’Artagnan; how was he?”

“Wonderfully well.”

“And what did you say to him, M. de Baisemeaux?”

“I told him,” continued the governor, not perceiving his own
thoughtlessness; “I told him that I fed my prisoners too well.”

“How many have you?” inquired Aramis, in an indifferent tone of voice.

“Sixty.”

“Well, that is a tolerably round number.”

“In former times, my lord, there were, during certain years, as many as
two hundred.”

“Still a minimum of sixty is not to be grumbled at.”

“Perhaps not; for, to anybody but myself, each prisoner would bring in
two hundred and fifty pistoles; for instance, for a prince of the blood
I have fifty francs a day.”

“Only you have no prince of the blood; at least, I suppose so,” said
Aramis, with a slight tremor in his voice.

“No, thank heaven!--I mean, no, unfortunately.”

“What do you mean by unfortunately?”

“Because my appointment would be improved by it. So fifty francs per day
for a prince of the blood, thirty-six for a marechal of France--”

“But you have as many marechals of France, I suppose, as you have
princes of the blood?”

“Alas! no more. It is true lieutenant-generals and brigadiers pay
twenty-six francs, and I have two of them. After that, come councilors
of parliament, who bring me fifteen francs, and I have six of them.”

“I did not know,” said Aramis, “that councilors were so productive.”

“Yes; but from fifteen francs I sink at once to ten francs; namely, for
an ordinary judge, and for an ecclesiastic.”

“And you have seven, you say; an excellent affair.”

“Nay, a bad one, and for this reason. How can I possibly treat these
poor fellows, who are of some good, at all events, otherwise than as a
councilor of parliament?”

“Yes, you are right; I do not see five francs difference between them.”

“You understand; if I have a fine fish, I pay four or five francs for
it; if I get a fine fowl, it cost me a franc and a half. I fatten a good
deal of poultry, but I have to buy grain, and you cannot imagine the
army of rats that infest this place.”

“Why not get half a dozen cats to deal with them?”

“Cats, indeed; yes, they eat them, but I was obliged to give up the idea
because of the way in which they treated my grain. I have been obliged
to have some terrier dogs sent me from England to kill the rats. These
dogs, unfortunately, have tremendous appetites; they eat as much as a
prisoner of the fifth order, without taking into account the rabbits and
fowls they kill.”

Was Aramis really listening or not? No one could have told; his downcast
eyes showed the attentive man, but the restless hand betrayed the man
absorbed in thought--Aramis was meditating.

“I was saying,” continued Baisemeaux, “that a good-sized fowl costs me
a franc and a half, and that a fine fish costs me four or five francs.
Three meals are served at the Bastile, and, as the prisoners, having
nothing to do, are always eating, a ten-franc man costs me seven francs
and a half.”

“But did you not say that you treated those at ten francs like those at
fifteen?”

“Yes, certainly.”

“Very well! Then you gain seven francs and a half upon those who pay you
fifteen francs.”

“I _must_ compensate myself somehow,” said Baisemeaux, who saw how he
had been snapped up.

“You are quite right, my dear governor; but have you no prisoners below
ten francs?”

“Oh, yes! we have citizens and barristers at five francs.”

“And do they eat, too?”

“Not a doubt about it; only you understand that they do not get fish or
poultry, nor rich wines at every meal; but at all events thrice a week
they have a good dish at their dinner.”

“Really, you are quite a philanthropist, my dear governor, and you will
ruin yourself.”

“No; understand me; when the fifteen-franc has not eaten his fowl, or
the ten-franc has left his dish unfinished, I send it to the five-franc
prisoner; it is a feast for the poor devil, and one must be charitable,
you know.”

“And what do you make out of your five-franc prisoners?”

“A franc and a half.”

“Baisemeaux, you’re an honest fellow; in honest truth I say so.”

“Thank you, my lord. But I feel most for the small tradesmen and
bailiffs’ clerks, who are rated at three francs. They do not often see
Rhine carp or Channel sturgeon.”

“But do not the five-franc gentlemen sometimes leave some scraps?”

“Oh! my lord, do not believe I am so stingy as that; I delight the heart
of some poor little tradesman or clerk by sending him a wing of a red
partridge, a slice of venison, or a slice of a truffled pasty, dishes
which he never tasted except in his dreams; these are the leavings of
the twenty-four-franc prisoners; and as he eats and drinks, at dessert
he cries ‘Long live the King,’ and blesses the Bastile; with a couple
bottles of champagne, which cost me five sous, I make him tipsy every
Sunday. That class of people call down blessings upon me, and are sorry
to leave the prison. Do you know that I have remarked, and it does me
infinite honor, that certain prisoners, who have been set at liberty,
have, almost immediately afterwards, got imprisoned again? Why should
this be the case, unless it be to enjoy the pleasures of my kitchen? It
is really the fact.”

Aramis smiled with an expression of incredulity.

“You smile,” said Baisemeaux.

“I do,” returned Aramis.

“I tell you that we have names which have been inscribed on our books
thrice in the space of two years.”

“I must see it before I believe it,” said Aramis.

“Well, I can show it to you, although it is prohibited to communicate
the registers to strangers; and if you really wish to see it with your
own eyes--”

“I should be delighted, I confess.”

“Very well,” said Baisemeaux, and he took out of a cupboard a large
register. Aramis followed him most anxiously with his eyes, and
Baisemeaux returned, placed the register upon the table, and turned over
the leaves for a minute, and stayed at the letter M.

“Look here,” said he, “Martinier, January, 1659; Martinier, June, 1660;
Martinier, March, 1661. Mazarinades, etc.; you understand it was only
a pretext; people were not sent to the Bastile for jokes against M.
Mazarin; the fellow denounced himself in order to get imprisoned here.”

“And what was his object?”

“None other than to return to my kitchen at three francs a day.”

“Three francs--poor devil!”

“The poet, my lord, belongs to the lowest scale, the same style of board
as the small tradesman and bailiff’s clerk; but I repeat, it is to those
people that I give these little surprises.”

Aramis mechanically turned over the leaves of the register, continuing
to read the names, but without appearing to take any interest in the
names he read.

“In 1661, you perceive,” said Baisemeaux, “eighty entries; and in 1659,
eighty also.”

“Ah!” said Aramis. “Seldon; I seem to know that name. Was it not you who
spoke to me about a certain young man?”

“Yes, a poor devil of a student, who made--What do you call that where
two Latin verses rhyme together?”

“A distich.”

“Yes; that is it.”

“Poor fellow; for a distich.”

“Do you know that he made this distich against the Jesuits?”

“That makes no difference; the punishment seems very severe. Do not pity
him; last year you seemed to interest yourself in him.”

“Yes, I did so.”

“Well, as your interest is all-powerful here, my lord, I have treated
him since that time as a prisoner at fifteen francs.”

“The same as this one, then,” said Aramis, who had continued turning
over the leaves, and who had stopped at one of the names which followed
Martinier.

“Yes, the same as that one.”

“Is that Marchiali an Italian?” said Aramis, pointing with his finger to
the name which had attracted his attention.

“Hush!” said Baisemeaux.

“Why hush?” said Aramis, involuntarily clenching his white hand.

“I thought I had already spoken to you about that Marchiali.”

“No, it is the first time I ever heard his name pronounced.”

“That may be, but perhaps I have spoken to you about him without naming
him.”

“Is he an old offender?” asked Aramis, attempting to smile.

“On the contrary, he is quite young.”

“Is his crime, then, very heinous?”

“Unpardonable.”

“Has he assassinated any one?”

“Bah!”

“An incendiary, then?”

“Bah!”

“Has he slandered any one?”

“No, no! It is he who--” and Baisemeaux approached Aramis’s ear,
making a sort of ear-trumpet of his hands, and whispered: “It is he who
presumes to resemble the--”

“Yes, yes,” said Aramis; “I now remember you already spoke about it last
year to me; but the crime appeared to me so slight.”

“Slight, do you say?”

“Or rather, so involuntary.”

“My lord, it is not involuntarily that such a resemblance is detected.”

“Well, the fact is, I had forgotten it. But, my dear host,” said Aramis,
closing the register, “if I am not mistaken, we are summoned.”

Baisemeaux took the register, hastily restored it to its place in the
closet, which he locked, and put the key in his pocket. “Will it be
agreeable to your lordship to breakfast now?” said he; “for you are
right in supposing that breakfast was announced.”

“Assuredly, my dear governor,” and they passed into the dining-room.



Chapter XXIV. The Breakfast at Monsieur de Baisemeaux’s.

Aramis was generally temperate; but on this occasion, while taking
every care of his constitution, he did ample justice to Baisemeaux’s
breakfast, which, in all respects, was most excellent. The latter on
his side, was animated with the wildest gayety; the sight of the five
thousand pistoles, which he glanced at from time to time, seemed to open
his heart. Every now and then he looked at Aramis with an expression of
the deepest gratitude; while the latter, leaning back in his chair, took
a few sips of wine from his glass, with the air of a connoisseur. “Let
me never hear any ill words against the fare of the Bastile,” said he,
half closing his eyes; “happy are the prisoners who can get only half a
bottle of such Burgundy every day.”

“All those at fifteen francs drink it,” said Baisemeaux. “It is very old
Volnay.”

“Does that poor student, Seldon, drink such good wine?”

“Oh, no!”

“I thought I heard you say he was boarded at fifteen francs.”

“He! no, indeed; a man who makes districts--distichs I mean--at fifteen
francs! No, no! it is his neighbor who is at fifteen francs.”

“Which neighbor?”

“The other, second Bertaudiere.”

“Excuse me, my dear governor; but you speak a language which requires
quite an apprenticeship to understand.”

“Very true,” said the governor. “Allow me to explain: second Bertaudiere
is the person who occupies the second floor of the tower of the
Bertaudiere.”

“So that Bertaudiere is the name of one of the towers of the Bastile?
The fact is, I think I recollect hearing that each tower has a name of
its own. Whereabouts is the one you are speaking of?”

“Look,” said Baisemeaux, going to the window. “It is that tower to the
left--the second one.”

“Is the prisoner at fifteen francs there?”

“Yes.”

“Since when?”

“Seven or eight years, nearly.”

“What do you mean by nearly? Do you not know the dates more precisely?”

“It was not in my time, M. d’Herblay.”

“But I should have thought that Louviere or Tremblay would have told
you.”

“The secrets of the Bastile are never handed over with the keys of the
governorship.”

“Indeed! Then the cause of his imprisonment is a mystery--a state
secret.”

“Oh, no! I do not suppose it is a state secret, but a secret--like
everything that happens at the Bastile.”

“But,” said Aramis, “why do you speak more freely of Seldon than of
second Bertaudiere?”

“Because, in my opinion, the crime of the man who writes a distich is
not so great as that of the man who resembles--”

“Yes, yes; I understand you. Still, do not the turnkeys talk with your
prisoners?”

“Of course.”

“The prisoners, I suppose, tell them they are not guilty?”

“They are _always_ telling them that; it is a matter of course; the same
song over and over again.”

“But does not the resemblance you were speaking about just now strike
the turnkeys?”

“My dear M. d’Herblay, it is only for men attached to the court, as you
are, to take trouble about such matters.”

“You’re right, you’re right, my dear M. Baisemeaux. Let me give you
another taste of this Volnay.”

“Not a taste merely, a full glass; fill yours too.”

“Nay, nay! You are a musketeer still, to the very tips of your fingers,
while I have become a bishop. A taste for me; a glass for yourself.”

“As you please.” And Aramis and the governor nodded to each other, as
they drank their wine. “But,” said Aramis, looking with fixed attention
at the ruby-colored wine he had raised to the level of his eyes, as if
he wished to enjoy it with all his senses at the same moment, “but
what you might call a resemblance, another would not, perhaps, take any
notice of.”

“Most certainly he would, though, if it were any one who knew the person
he resembles.”

“I really think, dear M. Baisemeaux, that it can be nothing more than a
resemblance of your own creation.”

“Upon my honor, it is not so.”

“Stay,” continued Aramis. “I have seen many persons very like the one
we are speaking of; but, out of respect, no one ever said anything about
it.”

“Very likely; because there is resemblance and resemblance. This is a
striking one, and, if you were to see him, you would admit it to be so.”

“If I were to see him, indeed,” said Aramis, in an indifferent tone;
“but in all probability I never shall.”

“Why not?”

“Because if I were even to put my foot inside one of those horrible
dungeons, I should fancy I was buried there forever.”

“No, no; the cells are very good places to live in.”

“I really do not, and cannot believe it, and that is a fact.”

“Pray do not speak ill of second Bertaudiere. It is really a good room,
very nicely furnished and carpeted. The young fellow has by no means
been unhappy there; the best lodging the Bastile affords has been his.
There is a chance for you.”

“Nay, nay,” said Aramis, coldly; “you will never make me believe there
are any good rooms in the Bastile; and, as for your carpets, they exist
only in your imagination. I should find nothing but spiders, rats, and
perhaps toads, too.”

“Toads?” cried Baisemeaux.

“Yes, in the dungeons.”

“Ah! I don’t say there are not toads in the dungeons,” replied
Baisemeaux. “But--will you be convinced by your own eyes?” he continued,
with a sudden impulse.

“No, certainly not.”

“Not even to satisfy yourself of the resemblance which you deny, as you
do the carpets?”

“Some spectral-looking person, a mere shadow; an unhappy, dying man.”

“Nothing of the kind--as brisk and vigorous a young fellow as ever
lived.”

“Melancholy and ill-tempered, then?”

“Not at all; very gay and lively.”

“Nonsense; you are joking.”

“Will you follow me?” said Baisemeaux.

“What for?”

“To go the round of the Bastile.”

“Why?”

“You will then see for yourself--see with your own eyes.”

“But the regulations?”

“Never mind them. To-day my major has leave of absence; the lieutenant
is visiting the post on the bastions; we are sole masters of the
situation.”

“No, no, my dear governor; why, the very idea of the sound of the bolts
makes me shudder. You will only have to forget me in second or fourth
Bertaudiere, and then--”

“You are refusing an opportunity that may never present itself again. Do
you know that, to obtain the favor I propose to you gratis, some of the
princes of the blood have offered me as much as fifty thousand francs.”

“Really! he must be worth seeing, then?”

“Forbidden fruit, my lord; forbidden fruit. You who belong to the church
ought to know that.”

“Well, if had any curiosity, it would be to see the poor author of the
distich.”

“Very well, we will see him, too; but if I were at all curious, it would
be about the beautiful carpeted room and its lodger.”

“Furniture is very commonplace; and a face with no expression in it
offers little or no interest.”

“But a boarder at fifteen francs is always interesting.”

“By the by, I forgot to ask you about that. Why fifteen francs for him,
and only three francs for poor Seldon?”

“The distinction made in that instance was a truly noble act, and one
which displayed the king’s goodness of heart to great advantage.”

“The king’s, you say.”

“The cardinal’s, I mean. ‘This unhappy man,’ said M. Mazarin, ‘is
destined to remain in prison forever.’”

“Why so?”

“Why, it seems that his crime is a lasting one; and, consequently, his
punishment ought to be so, too.”

“Lasting?”

“No doubt of it, unless he is fortunate enough to catch the small-pox,
and even that is difficult, for we never get any impure air here.”

“Nothing can be more ingenious than your train of reasoning, my dear M.
Baisemeaux. Do you, however, mean to say that this unfortunate man must
suffer without interruption or termination?”

“I did not say he was to suffer, my lord; a fifteen-franc boarder does
not suffer.”

“He suffers imprisonment, at all events.”

“No doubt; there is no help for that, but this suffering is sweetened
for him. You must admit that this young fellow was not born to eat all
the good things he does eat; for instance, such things as we have on the
table now; this pasty that has not been touched, these crawfish from the
River Marne, of which we have hardly taken any, and which are almost
as large as lobsters; all these things will at once be taken to second
Bertaudiere, with a bottle of that Volnay which you think so excellent.
After you have seen it you will believe it, I hope.”

“Yes, my dear governor, certainly; but all this time you are thinking
only of your very happy fifteen-franc prisoner, and you forget poor
Seldon, my _protege_.”

“Well, out of consideration for you, it shall be a gala day for him; he
shall have some biscuits and preserves with this small bottle of port.”

“You are a good-hearted fellow; I have said so already, and I repeat it,
my dear Baisemeaux.”

“Well, let us set off, then,” said the governor, a little bewildered,
partly from the wine he had drunk, and partly from Aramis’s praises.

“Do not forget that I only go to oblige you,” said the prelate.

“Very well; but you will thank me when you get there.”

“Let us go, then.”

“Wait until I have summoned the jailer,” said Baisemeaux, as he struck
the bell twice; at which summons a man appeared. “I am going to visit
the towers,” said the governor. “No guards, no drums, no noise at all.”

“If I were not to leave my cloak here,” said Aramis, pretending to
be alarmed, “I should really think I was going to prison on my own
account.”

The jailer preceded the governor, Aramis walking on his right hand; some
of the soldiers who happened to be in the courtyard drew themselves up
in a line, as stiff as posts, as the governor passed along. Baisemeaux
led the way down several steps which conducted to a sort of esplanade;
thence they arrived at the drawbridge, where the sentinels on duty
received the governor with the proper honors. The governor turned toward
Aramis, and, speaking in such a tone that the sentinels could not lose a
word, he observed,--“I hope you have a good memory, monsieur?”

“Why?” inquired Aramis.

“On account of your plans and your measurements, for you know that no
one is allowed, not architects even, to enter where the prisoners are,
with paper, pens or pencil.”

“Good,” said Aramis to himself, “it seems I am an architect, then. It
sounds like one of D’Artagnan’s jokes, who perceived in me the engineer
of Belle-Isle.” Then he added aloud: “Be easy on that score,
monsieur; in our profession, a mere glance and a good memory are quite
sufficient.”

Baisemeaux did not change countenance, and the soldiers took Aramis for
what he seemed to be. “Very well; we will first visit la Bertaudiere,”
 said Baisemeaux, still intending the sentinels to hear him. Then,
turning to the jailer, he added: “You will take the opportunity of
carrying to No. 2 the few dainties I pointed out.”

“Dear M. de Baisemeaux,” said Aramis, “you are always forgetting No. 3.”

“So I am,” said the governor; and upon that, they began to ascend. The
number of bolts, gratings, and locks for this single courtyard would
have sufficed for the safety of an entire city. Aramis was neither an
imaginative nor a sensitive man; he had been somewhat of a poet in his
youth, but his heart was hard and indifferent, as the heart of every man
of fifty-five years of age is, who has been frequently and passionately
attached to women in his lifetime, or rather who has been passionately
loved by them. But when he placed his foot upon the worn stone steps,
along which so many unhappy wretches had passed, when he felt himself
impregnated, as it were, with the atmosphere of those gloomy dungeons,
moistened with tears, there could be but little doubt he was overcome
by his feelings, for his head was bowed and his eyes became dim, as he
followed Baisemeaux without a syllable.



Chapter XXV. The Second Floor of la Bertaudiere.

On the second flight of stairs, whether from fatigue or emotion, the
breathing of the visitor began to fail him, and he leaned against the
wall. “Will you begin with this one?” said Baisemeaux; “for since we are
going to both, it matters very little whether we ascend from the second
to the third story, or descend from the third to the second.”

“No, no,” exclaimed Aramis, eagerly, “higher, if you please; the one
above is the more urgent.” They continued their ascent. “Ask the jailer
for the keys,” whispered Aramis. Baisemeaux did so, took the keys, and,
himself, opened the door of the third room. The jailer was the first to
enter; he placed upon the table the provisions, which the kind-hearted
governor called dainties, and then left the room. The prisoner had
not stirred; Baisemeaux then entered, while Aramis remained at the
threshold, from which place he saw a youth about eighteen years of age,
who, raising his head at the unusual noise, jumped off the bed, as he
perceived the governor, and clasping his hands together, began to cry
out, “My mother, my mother,” in tones which betrayed such deep distress
that Aramis, despite his command over himself, felt a shudder pass
through his frame. “My dear boy,” said Baisemeaux, endeavoring to smile,
“I have brought you a diversion and an extra,--the one for the mind, the
other for the body; this gentleman has come to take your measure, and
here are some preserves for your dessert.”

“Oh, monsieur!” exclaimed the young man, “keep me in solitude for a year,
let me have nothing but bread and water for a year, but tell me that at
the end of a year I shall leave this place, tell me that at the end of a
year I shall see my mother again.”

“But I have heard you say that your mother was very poor, and that you
were very badly lodged when you were living with her, while here--upon
my word!”

“If she were poor, monsieur, the greater reason to restore her only
means of support to her. Badly lodged with her! Oh, monsieur, every one
is always well lodged when he is free.”

“At all events, since you yourself admit you have done nothing but write
that unhappy distich--”

“But without any intention, I swear. Let me be punished--cut off the
hand which wrote it, I will work with the other--but restore my mother
to me.”

“My boy,” said Baisemeaux, “you know very well that it does not depend
upon me; all I can do for you is to increase your rations, give you a
glass of port wine now and then, slip in a biscuit for you between a
couple of plates.”

“Great heaven!” exclaimed the young man, falling backward and rolling on
the ground.

Aramis, unable to bear this scene any longer, withdrew as far as the
landing. “Unhappy, wretched man,” he murmured.

“Yes, monsieur, he is indeed very wretched,” said the jailer; “but it is
his parents’ fault.”

“In what way?”

“No doubt. Why did they let him learn Latin? Too much knowledge, you
see; it is that which does harm. Now I, for instance, can’t read or
write, and therefore I am not in prison.” Aramis looked at the man,
who seemed to think that being a jailer in the Bastile was not being in
prison. As for Baisemeaux, noticing the little effect produced by his
advice and his port wine, he left the dungeon quite upset. “You have
forgotten to close the door,” said the jailer.

“So I have,” said Baisemeaux; “there are the keys, do you do it.”

“I will solicit the pardon of that poor boy,” said Aramis.

“And if you do not succeed,” said Baisemeaux, “at least beg that he may
be transferred to the ten-franc list, by which both he and I shall be
gainers.”

“If the other prisoner calls out for his mother in a similar manner,”
 said Aramis, “I prefer not to enter at all, but will take my measure
from outside.”

“No fear of that, monsieur architect, the one we are now going to see is
as gentle as a lamb; before he could call after his mother he must open
his lips, and he never says a word.”

“Let us go in, then,” said Aramis, gloomily.

“Are you the architect of the prisons, monsieur?” said the jailer.

“I am.”

“It is odd, then, that you are not more accustomed to all this.”

Aramis perceived that, to avoid giving rise to any suspicions, he must
summon all his strength of mind to his assistance. Baisemeaux, who
carried the keys, opened the door. “Stay outside,” he said to the
jailer, “and wait for us at the bottom of the steps.” The jailer obeyed
and withdrew.

Baisemeaux entered first, and opened the second door himself. By the
light which filtered through the iron-barred window, could be seen a
handsome young man, short in stature, with closely cut hair, and a beard
beginning to grow; he was sitting on a stool, his elbow resting on an
armchair, and with all the upper part of his body reclining against it.
His dress, thrown upon the bed, was of rich black velvet, and he inhaled
the fresh air which blew in upon his breast through a shirt of the very
finest cambric. As the governor entered, the young man turned his head
with a look full of indifference; and on recognizing Baisemeaux, he
arose and saluted him courteously. But when his eyes fell upon Aramis,
who remained in the background, the latter trembled, turned pale, and
his hat, which he held in his hand, fell upon the ground, as if all
his muscles had become relaxed at once. Baisemeaux, habituated to the
presence of his prisoner, did not seem to share any of the sensations
which Aramis experienced, but, with all the zeal of a good servant, he
busied himself in arranging on the table the pasty and crawfish he
had brought with him. Occupied in this manner, he did not remark how
disturbed his guest had become. When he had finished, however, he turned
to the young prisoner and said: “You are looking very well,--are you
so?”

“Quite well, I thank you, monsieur,” replied the young man.

The effect of the voice was such as almost to overpower Aramis, and
notwithstanding his control over himself, he advanced a few steps
towards him, with his eyes wide open and his lips trembling. The
movement he made was so marked that Baisemeaux, notwithstanding his
preoccupation, observed it. “This gentleman is an architect who has come
to examine your chimney,” said Baisemeaux; “does it smoke?”

“Never, monsieur.”

“You were saying just now,” said the governor, rubbing his hands
together, “that it was not possible for a man to be happy in prison;
here, however, is one who is so. You have nothing to complain of, I
hope?”

“Nothing.”

“Do you ever feel weary?” said Aramis.

“Never.”

“Ha, ha,” said Baisemeaux, in a low tone of voice; “was I right?”

“Well, my dear governor, it is impossible not to yield to evidence. Is
it allowed to put any question to him?”

“As many as you like.”

“Very well; be good enough to ask him if he knows why he is here.”

“This gentleman requests me to ask you,” said Baisemeaux, “if you are
aware of the cause of your imprisonment?”

“No, monsieur,” said the young man, unaffectedly, “I am not.”

“That is hardly possible,” said Aramis, carried away by his feelings
in spite of himself; “if you were really ignorant of the cause of your
detention, you would be furious.”

“I was so during the early days of my imprisonment.”

“Why are you not so now?”

“Because I have reflected.”

“That is strange,” said Aramis.

“Is it not odd?” said Baisemeaux.

“May one venture to ask you, monsieur, on what you have reflected?”

“I felt that as I had committed no crime, Heaven could not punish me.”

“What is a prison, then,” inquired Aramis, “if it be not a punishment.”

“Alas! I cannot tell,” said the young man; “all that I can tell you now
is the very opposite of what I felt seven years ago.”

“To hear you converse, to witness your resignation, one might almost
believe that you liked your imprisonment?”

“I endure it.”

“In the certainty of recovering your freedom some day, I suppose?”

“I have no certainty; hope, I have, and that is all; and yet I
acknowledge that this hope becomes less every day.”

“Still, why should you not again be free, since you have already been
so?”

“That is precisely the reason,” replied the young man, “which prevents
me from expecting liberty; why should I have been imprisoned at all if
it had been intended to release me afterwards?”

“How old are you?”

“I do not know.”

“What is your name?”

“I have forgotten the name by which I was called.”

“Who are your parents?”

“I never knew them.”

“But those who brought you up?”

“They did not call me their son.”

“Did you ever love any one before coming here?”

“I loved my nurse, and my flowers.”

“Was that all?”

“I also loved my valet.”

“Do you regret your nurse and your valet?”

“I wept very much when they died.”

“Did they die since you have been here, or before you came?”

“They died the evening before I was carried off.”

“Both at the same time?”

“Yes, both at the same time.”

“In what manner were you carried off?”

“A man came for me, directed me to get into a carriage, which was closed
and locked, and brought me here.”

“Would you be able to recognize that man again?”

“He was masked.”

“Is this not an extraordinary tale?” said Baisemeaux, in a low tone of
voice, to Aramis, who could hardly breathe.

“It is indeed extraordinary,” he murmured.

“But what is still more extraordinary is, that he has never told me so
much as he has just told you.”

“Perhaps the reason may be that you have never questioned him,” said
Aramis.

“It’s possible,” replied Baisemeaux; “I have no curiosity. Have you
looked at the room? it’s a fine one, is it not?”

“Very much so.”

“A carpet--”

“Beautiful.”

“I’ll wager he had nothing like it before he came here.”

“I think so, too.” And then again turning towards the young man, he
said, “Do you not remember to have been visited at some time or another
by a strange lady or gentleman?”

“Yes, indeed; thrice by a woman, who each time came to the door in a
carriage, and entered covered with a veil, which she raised when we were
together and alone.”

“Do you remember that woman?”

“Yes.”

“What did she say to you?”

The young man smiled mournfully, and then replied, “She inquired, as you
have just done, if I were happy, and if I were getting weary.”

“What did she do on arriving, and on leaving you?”

“She pressed me in her arms, held me in her embrace, and kissed me.”

“Do you remember her?”

“Perfectly.”

“Do you recall her features distinctly?”

“Yes.”

“You would recognize her, then, if accident brought her before you, or
led you into her person?”

“Most certainly.”

A flush of fleeting satisfaction passed across Aramis’s face. At this
moment Baisemeaux heard the jailer approaching. “Shall we leave?” he
said, hastily, to Aramis.

Aramis, who probably had learnt all that he cared to know, replied,
“When you like.”

The young man saw them prepare to leave, and saluted them politely.
Baisemeaux replied merely by a nod of the head, while Aramis, with a
respect, arising perhaps from the sight of such misfortune, saluted the
prisoner profoundly. They left the room, Baisemeaux closing the door
behind them.

“Well,” said Baisemeaux, as they descended the staircase, “what do you
think of it all?”

“I have discovered the secret, my dear governor,” he said.

“Bah! what is the secret, then?”

“A murder was committed in that house.”

“Nonsense.”

“But attend; the valet and nurse died the same day.”

“Well.”

“And by poison. What do you think?”

“That is very likely to be true.”

“What! that that young man is an assassin?”

“Who said that? What makes you think that poor young fellow could be an
assassin?”

“The very thing I was saying. A crime was committed in his house,” said
Aramis, “and that was quite sufficient; perhaps he saw the criminals,
and it was feared that he might say something.”

“The deuce! if I only thought that--”

“Well?”

“I would redouble the surveillance.”

“Oh, he does not seem to wish to escape.”

“You do not know what prisoners are.”

“Has he any books?”

“None; they are strictly prohibited, and under M. de Mazarin’s own
hand.”

“Have you the writing still?”

“Yes, my lord; would you like to look at it as you return to take your
cloak?”

“I should, for I like to look at autographs.”

“Well, then, this one is of the most unquestionable authenticity; there
is only one erasure.”

“Ah, ah! an erasure; and in what respect?”

“With respect to a figure. At first there was written: ‘To be boarded at
fifty francs.’”

“As princes of the blood, in fact?”

“But the cardinal must have seen his mistake, you understand; for he
canceled the zero, and has added a one before the five. But, by the
by--”

“What?”

“You do not speak of the resemblance.”

“I do not speak of it, dear M. de Baisemeaux, for a very simple reason--
because it does not exist.”

“The deuce it doesn’t.”

“Or, if it does exist, it is only in your own imagination; but,
supposing it were to exist elsewhere, I think it would be better for you
not to speak of about it.”

“Really.”

“The king, Louis XIV.--you understand--would be excessively angry with
you, if he were to learn that you contributed in any way to spread the
report that one of his subjects has the effrontery to resemble him.”

“It is true, quite true,” said Baisemeaux, thoroughly alarmed; “but I
have not spoken of the circumstance to any one but yourself, and you
understand, monseigneur, that I perfectly rely on your discretion.”

“Oh, be easy.”

“Do you still wish to see the note?”

“Certainly.”

While engaged in this manner in conversation, they had returned to
the governor’s apartments; Baisemeaux took from the cupboard a private
register, like the one he had already shown Aramis, but fastened by
a lock, the key which opened it being one of a small bunch which
Baisemeaux always carried with him. Then placing the book upon the
table, he opened it at the letter “M,” and showed Aramis the following
note in the column of observations: “No books at any time; all linen
and clothes of the finest and best quality to be procured; no exercise;
always the same jailer; no communications with any one. Musical
instruments; every liberty and every indulgence which his welfare may
require; to be boarded at fifteen francs. M. de Baisemeaux can claim
more if the fifteen francs be not sufficient.”

“Ah,” said Baisemeaux, “now I think of it, I shall claim it.”

Aramis shut the book. “Yes,” he said, “it is indeed M. de Mazarin’s
handwriting; I recognize it well. Now, my dear governor,” he continued,
as if this last communication had exhausted his interest, “let us now
turn over to our own little affairs.”

“Well, what time for repayment do you wish me to take? Fix it yourself.”

“There need not be any particular period fixed; give me a simple
acknowledgement for one hundred and fifty thousand francs.”

“When to be made payable?”

“When I require it; but, you understand, I shall only wish it when you
yourself do.”

“Oh, I am quite easy on that score,” said Baisemeaux, smiling; “but I
have already given you two receipts.”

“Which I now destroy,” said Aramis; and after having shown the two
receipts to Baisemeaux, he destroyed them. Overcome by so great a mark
of confidence, Baisemeaux unhesitatingly wrote out an acknowledgement of
a debt of one hundred and fifty thousand francs, payable at the pleasure
of the prelate. Aramis, who had, by glancing over the governor’s
shoulder, followed the pen as he wrote, put the acknowledgement into his
pocket without seeming to have read it, which made Baisemeaux perfectly
easy. “Now,” said Aramis, “you will not be angry with me if I were to
carry off one of your prisoners?”

“What do you mean?”

“By obtaining his pardon, of course. Have I not already told you that I
took a great interest in poor Seldon?”

“Yes, quite true, you did so.”

“Well?”

“That is your affair; do as you think proper. I see you have an open
hand, and an arm that can reach a great way.”

“Adieu, adieu.” And Aramis left, carrying with him the governor’s best
wishes.



Chapter XXVI. The Two Friends.

At the very time M. de Baisemeaux was showing Aramis the prisoners in
the Bastile, a carriage drew up at Madame de Belliere’s door, and, at
that still early hour, a young woman alighted, her head muffled in
a silk hood. When the servants announced Madame Vanel to Madame de
Belliere, the latter was engaged, or rather was absorbed, in reading
a letter, which she hurriedly concealed. She had hardly finished her
morning toilette, her maid being still in the next room. At the name--at
the footsteps of Marguerite Vanel, Madame de Belliere ran to meet her.
She fancied she could detect in her friend’s eyes a brightness which was
neither that of health nor of pleasure. Marguerite embraced her, pressed
her hands, and hardly allowed her time to speak. “Dearest,” she
said, “have you forgotten me? Have you quite given yourself up to the
pleasures of the court?”

“I have not even seen the marriage _fetes_.”

“What are you doing with yourself, then?”

“I am getting ready to leave for Belliere.”

“For Belliere?”

“Yes.”

“You are becoming rustic in your tastes, then; I delight to see you so
disposed. But you are pale.”

“No, I am perfectly well.”

“So much the better; I was becoming uneasy about you. You do not know
what I have been told.”

“People say so many things.”

“Yes, but this is very singular.”

“How well you know how to excite curiosity, Marguerite.”

“Well, I was afraid of vexing you.”

“Never; you have yourself always admired me for my evenness of temper.”

“Well, then, it is said that--no, I shall never be able to tell you.”

“Do not let us talk about it, then,” said Madame de Belliere, who
detected the ill-nature that was concealed by all these prefaces, yet
felt the most anxious curiosity on the subject.

“Well, then, my dear marquise, it is said, for some time past, you no
longer continue to regret Monsieur de Belliere as you used to.”

“It is an ill-natured report, Marguerite. I do regret, and shall always
regret, my husband; but it is now two years since he died. I am only
twenty-eight years old, and my grief at his loss ought not always to
control every action and thought of my life. You, Marguerite, who are
the model of a wife, would not believe me if I were to say so.”

“Why not? Your heart is so soft and yielding,” she said, spitefully.

“Yours is so, too, Marguerite, and yet I did not perceive that you
allowed yourself to be overcome by grief when your heart was wounded.”
 These words were in direct allusion to Marguerite’s rupture with the
superintendent, and were also a veiled but direct reproach made against
her friend’s heart.

As if she only awaited this signal to discharge her shaft, Marguerite
exclaimed, “Well, Elise, it is said you are in love.” And she looked
fixedly at Madame de Belliere, who blushed against her will.

“Women can never escape slander,” replied the marquise, after a moment’s
pause.

“No one slanders you, Elise.”

“What!--people say that I am in love, and yet they do not slander me!”

“In the first place, if it be true, it is no slander, but simply a
scandal-loving report. In the next place--for you did not allow me
to finish what I was saying--the public does not assert that you have
abandoned yourself to this passion. It represents you, on the contrary,
as a virtuous but loving woman, defending yourself with claws and
teeth, shutting yourself up in your own house as in a fortress; in other
respects, as impenetrable as that of Danae, notwithstanding Danae’s
tower was made of brass.”

“You are witty, Marguerite,” said Madame de Belliere, angrily.

“You always flatter me, Elise. In short, however, you are reported to be
incorruptible and unapproachable. You cannot decide whether the world is
calumniating you or not; but what is it you are musing about while I am
speaking to you?”

“I?”

“Yes; you are blushing and do not answer me.”

“I was trying,” said the marquise, raising her beautiful eyes brightened
with an indication of growing temper, “I was trying to discover to what
you could possibly have alluded, you who are so learned in mythological
subjects, in comparing me to Danae.”

“You were trying to guess that?” said Marguerite, laughing.

“Yes; do you not remember that at the convent, when we were solving our
problems in arithmetic--ah! what I have to tell you is learned also, but
it is my turn--do you not remember, that if one of the terms were given,
we were to find the other? Therefore do _you_ guess now?”

“I cannot conjecture what you mean.”

“And yet nothing is more simple. You pretend that I am in love, do you
not?”

“So it is said.”

“Very well; it is not said, I suppose, that I am in love with an
abstraction. There must surely be a name mentioned in this report.”

“Certainly, a name is mentioned.”

“Very well; it is not surprising, then, that I should try to guess this
name, since you do not tell it.”

“My dear marquise, when I saw you blush, I did not think you would have
to spend much time in conjectures.”

“It was the word Danae which you used that surprised me. Danae means a
shower of gold, does it not?”

“That is to say that the Jupiter of Danae changed himself into a shower
of gold for her.”

“My lover, then, he whom you assign me--”

“I beg your pardon; I am your friend, and assign you no one.”

“That may be; but those who are ill disposed towards me.”

“Do you wish to hear the name?”

“I have been waiting this half hour for it.”

“Well, then, you shall hear it. Do not be shocked; he is a man high in
power.”

“Good,” said the marquise, as she clenched her hands like a patient at
the approach of the knife.

“He is a very wealthy man,” continued Marguerite; “the wealthiest, it
may be. In a word, it is--”

The marquise closed her eyes for a moment.

“It is the Duke of Buckingham,” said Marguerite, bursting into laughter.
This perfidy had been calculated with extreme ability; the name that
was pronounced, instead of the name which the marquise awaited, had
precisely the same effect upon her as the badly sharpened axes, that had
hacked, without destroying, Messieurs de Chalais and de Thou upon the
scaffold. She recovered herself, however, and said, “I was perfectly
right in saying you were a witty woman, for you are making the time pass
away most agreeably. This joke is a most amusing one, for I have never
seen the Duke of Buckingham.”

“Never?” said Marguerite, restraining her laughter.

“I have never even left my own house since the duke has been at Paris.”

“Oh!” resumed Madame Vanel, stretching out her foot towards a paper
which was lying on the carpet near the window; “it is not necessary for
people to see each other, since they can write.” The marquise trembled,
for this paper was the envelope of the letter she was reading as her
friend had entered, and was sealed with the superintendent’s arms. As
she leaned back on the sofa on which she was sitting, Madame de Belliere
covered the paper with the thick folds of her large silk dress, and so
concealed it.

“Come, Marguerite, tell me, is it to tell me all these foolish reports
that you have come to see me so early in the day?”

“No; I came to see you, in the first place, and to remind you of those
habits of our earlier days, so delightful to remember, when we used to
wander about together at Vincennes, and, sitting beneath an oak, or in
some sylvan shade, used to talk of those we loved, and who loved us.”

“Do you propose that we should go out together now?”

“My carriage is here, and I have three hours at my disposal.”

“I am not dressed yet, Marguerite; but if you wish that we should talk
together, we can, without going to the woods of Vincennes, find in my
own garden here, beautiful trees, shady groves, a green sward covered
with daisies and violets, the perfume of which can be perceived from
where we are sitting.”

“I regret your refusal, my dear marquise, for I wanted to pour out my
whole heart into yours.”

“I repeat again, Marguerite, my heart is yours just as much in this
room, or beneath the lime-trees in the garden here, as it would be under
the oaks in the woods yonder.”

“It is not the same thing for me. In approaching Vincennes, marquise,
my ardent aspirations approach nearer to that object towards which they
have for some days past been directed.” The marquise suddenly raised
her head. “Are you surprised, then, that I am still thinking of
Saint-Mande?”

“Of Saint-Mande?” exclaimed Madame de Belliere; and the looks of both
women met each other like two resistless swords.

“You, so proud!” said the marquise, disdainfully.

“I, so proud!” replied Madame Vanel. “Such is my nature. I do not
forgive neglect--I cannot endure infidelity. When I leave any one who
weeps at my abandonment, I feel induced still to love him; but when
others forsake me and laugh at their infidelity, I love distractedly.”

Madame de Belliere could not restrain an involuntary movement.

“She is jealous,” said Marguerite to herself.

“Then,” continued the marquise, “you are quite enamored of the Duke
of Buckingham--I mean of M. Fouquet?” Elise felt the allusion, and
her blood seemed to congeal in her heart. “And you wished to go to
Vincennes,--to Saint-Mande, even?”

“I hardly know what I wished: you would have advised me perhaps.”

“In what respect?”

“You have often done so.”

“Most certainly I should not have done so in the present instance, for
I do not forgive as you do. I am less loving, perhaps; when my heart has
been once wounded, it remains so always.”

“But M. Fouquet has not wounded you,” said Marguerite Vanel, with the
most perfect simplicity.

“You perfectly understand what I mean. M. Fouquet has not wounded me;
I do not know of either obligation or injury received at his hands, but
you have reason to complain of him. You are my friend, and I am afraid I
should not advise you as you would like.”

“Ah! you are prejudging the case.”

“The sighs you spoke of just now are more than indications.”

“You overwhelm me,” said the young woman suddenly, as if collecting her
whole strength, like a wrestler preparing for a last struggle; “you take
only my evil dispositions and my weaknesses into calculation, and do
not speak of my pure and generous feelings. If, at this moment, I feel
instinctively attracted towards the superintendent, if I even make an
advance to him, which, I confess, is very probable, my motive for it
is, that M. Fouquet’s fate deeply affects me, and because he is, in my
opinion, one of the most unfortunate men living.”

“Ah!” said the marquise, placing her hand upon her heart, “something
new, then, has occurred?”

“Do you not know it?”

“I am utterly ignorant of everything about him,” said Madame de
Belliere, with the poignant anguish that suspends thought and speech,
and even life itself.

“In the first place, then, the king’s favor is entirely withdrawn from
M. Fouquet, and conferred on M. Colbert.”

“So it is stated.”

“It is very clear, since the discovery of the plot of Belle-Isle.”

“I was told that the discovery of the fortifications there had turned
out to M. Fouquet’s honor.”

Marguerite began to laugh in so cruel a manner that Madame de Belliere
could at that moment have delightedly plunged a dagger in her bosom.
“Dearest,” continued Marguerite, “there is no longer any question of M.
Fouquet’s honor; his safety is concerned. Before three days are passed
the ruin of the superintendent will be complete.”

“Stay,” said the marquise, in her turn smiling, “that is going a little
fast.”

“I said three days, because I wish to deceive myself with a hope; but
probably the catastrophe will be complete within twenty-four hours.”

“Why so?”

“For the simplest of all reasons,--that M. Fouquet has no more money.”

“In matters of finance, my dear Marguerite, some are without money
to-day, who to-morrow can procure millions.”

“That might be M. Fouquet’s case when he had two wealthy and clever
friends who amassed money for him, and wrung it from every possible or
impossible source; but those friends are dead.”

“Money does not die, Marguerite; it may be concealed, but it can be
looked for, bought and found.”

“You see things on the bright side, and so much the better for you. It
is really very unfortunate that you are not the Egeria of M. Fouquet;
you might now show him the source whence he could obtain the millions
which the king asked him for yesterday.”

“Millions!” said the marquise, in terror.

“Four--an even number.”

“Infamous!” murmured Madame de Belliere, tortured by her friend’s
merciless delight.

“M. Fouquet, I should think, must certainly have four millions,” she
replied, courageously.

“If he has those which the king requires to-day,” said Marguerite, “he
will not, perhaps, possess those which the king will demand in a month
or so.”

“The king will exact money from him again, then?”

“No doubt; and that is my reason for saying that the ruin of poor M.
Fouquet is inevitable. Pride will induce him to furnish the money, and
when he has no more, he will fall.”

“It is true,” said the marquise, trembling; “the plan is a bold one; but
tell me, does M. Colbert hate M. Fouquet so very much?”

“I think he does not like him. M. Colbert is powerful; he improves
on close acquaintance; he has gigantic ideas, a strong will, and
discretion; he will rise.”

“He will be superintendent?”

“It is probable. Such is the reason, my dear marquise, why I felt myself
impressed in favor of that poor man, who once loved, and even adored me;
and why, when I see him so unfortunate, I forgive his infidelity, which
I have reason to believe he also regrets; and why, moreover, I should
not have been disinclined to afford him some consolation, or some good
advice; he would have understood the step I had taken, and would have
thought kindly of me for it. It is gratifying to be loved, you know.
Men value love more highly when they are no longer blinded by its
influence.”

The marquise, bewildered and overcome by these cruel attacks, which had
been calculated with the greatest nicety and precision, hardly knew what
to answer in return; she even seemed to have lost all power of thought.
Her perfidious friend’s voice had assumed the most affectionate tone;
she spoke as a woman, but concealed the instincts of a wolf.

“Well,” said Madame de Belliere, who had a vague hope that Marguerite
would cease to overwhelm a vanquished enemy, “why do you not go and see
M. Fouquet?”

“Decidedly, marquise, you have made me reflect. No, it would be
unbecoming for me to make the first advance. M. Fouquet no doubt loves
me, but he is too proud. I cannot expose myself to an affront....
besides, I have my husband to consider. You tell me nothing? Very well,
I shall consult M. Colbert on the subject.” Marguerite rose smilingly,
as though to take leave, but the marquise had not the strength to
imitate her. Marguerite advanced a few paces, in order that she might
continue to enjoy the humiliating grief in which her rival was plunged,
and then said, suddenly,--“You do not accompany me to the door, then?”
 The marquise rose, pale and almost lifeless, without thinking of
the envelope, which had occupied her attention so greatly at the
commencement of the conversation, and which was revealed at the first
step she took. She then opened the door of her oratory, and without even
turning her head towards Marguerite Vanel, entered it, closing the door
after her. Marguerite said, or rather muttered a few words, which Madame
de Belliere did not even hear. As soon, however, as the marquise had
disappeared, her envious enemy, not being able to resist the desire
to satisfy herself that her suspicions were well founded, advanced
stealthily like a panther, and seized the envelope. “Ah!” she said,
gnashing her teeth, “it was indeed a letter from M. Fouquet she was
reading when I arrived,” and then darted out of the room. During this
interval, the marquise, having arrived behind the rampart, as it were,
of her door, felt that her strength was failing her; for a moment she
remained rigid, pale and motionless as a statue, and then, like a statue
shaken on its base by an earthquake, tottered and fell inanimate on
the carpet. The noise of the fall resounded at the same moment as the
rolling of Marguerite’s carriage leaving the hotel.



Chapter XXVII. Madame de Belliere’s Plate.

The blow had been the more painful on account of its being unexpected.
It was some time before the marquise recovered herself; but once
recovered, she began to reflect upon the events so heartlessly announced
to her. She therefore returned, at the risk even of losing her life in
the way, to that train of ideas which her relentless friend had
forced her to pursue. Treason, then--deep menaces, concealed under
the semblance of public interest--such were Colbert’s maneuvers. A
detestable delight at an approaching downfall, untiring efforts to
attain this object, means of seduction no less wicked than the crime
itself--such were the weapons Marguerite employed. The crooked atoms
of Descartes triumphed; to the man without compassion was united a
woman without heart. The marquise perceived, with sorrow rather than
indignation, that the king was an accomplice in the plot which betrayed
the duplicity of Louis XIII. in his advanced age, and the avarice of
Mazarin at a period of life when he had not had the opportunity of
gorging himself with French gold. The spirit of this courageous
woman soon resumed its energy, no longer overwhelmed by indulgence in
compassionate lamentations. The marquise was not one to weep when action
was necessary, nor to waste time in bewailing a misfortune as long as
means still existed of relieving it. For some minutes she buried her
face in her cold fingers, and then, raising her head, rang for her
attendants with a steady hand, and with a gesture betraying a fixed
determination of purpose. Her resolution was taken.

“Is everything prepared for my departure?” she inquired of one of her
female attendants who entered.

“Yes, madame; but it was not expected that your ladyship would leave for
Belliere for the next few days.”

“All my jewels and articles of value, then, are packed up?”

“Yes, madame; but hitherto we have been in the habit of leaving them in
Paris. Your ladyship does not generally take your jewels with you into
the country.”

“But they are all in order, you say?”

“Yes, in your ladyship’s own room.”

“The gold plate?”

“In the chest.”

“And the silver plate?”

“In the great oak closet.”

The marquise remained silent for a few moments, and then said calmly,
“Let my goldsmith be sent for.”

Her attendants quitted the room to execute the order. The marquise,
however, had entered her own room, and was inspecting her casket of
jewels with the greatest attention. Never, until now, had she bestowed
such close attention upon riches in which women take so much pride;
never, until now, had she looked at her jewels, except for the purpose
of making a selection according to their settings or their colors.
On this occasion, however, she admired the size of the rubies and the
brilliancy of the diamonds; she grieved over every blemish and every
defect; she thought the gold light, and the stones wretched. The
goldsmith, as he entered, found her thus occupied. “M. Faucheux,” she
said, “I believe you supplied me with my gold service?”

“I did, your ladyship.”

“I do not now remember the amount of the account.”

“Of the new service, madame, or of that which M. de Belliere presented
to you on your marriage? for I have furnished both.”

“First of all, the new one.”

“The covers, the goblets, and the dishes, with their covers, the
_eau-epergne_, the ice-pails, the dishes for the preserves, and the tea
and coffee urns, cost your ladyship sixty thousand francs.”

“No more?”

“Your ladyship thought the account very high.”

“Yes, yes; I remember, in fact, that it was dear; but it was the
workmanship, I suppose?”

“Yes, madame; the designs, the chasings--all new patterns.”

“What proportion of the cost does the workmanship form? Do not hesitate
to tell me.”

“A third of its value, madame.”

“There is the other service, the old one, that which belonged to my
husband?”

“Yes, madame; there is less workmanship in that than in the other. Its
intrinsic value does not exceed thirty thousand francs.”

“Thirty thousand,” murmured the marquise. “But, M. Faucheux, there is
also the service which belonged to my mother; all that massive plate
which I did not wish to part with, on account of the associations
connected with it.”

“Ah! madame, that would indeed be an excellent resource for those who,
unlike your ladyship, might not be in position to keep their plate. In
chasing that they worked in solid metal. But that service is no longer
in fashion. Its weight is its only advantage.”

“That is all I care about. How much does it weigh?”

“Fifty thousand livres at the very least. I do not allude to the
enormous vases for the buffet, which alone weigh five thousand livres,
or ten thousand the pair.”

“One hundred and thirty,” murmured the marquise. “You are quite sure of
your figures, M. Faucheux?”

“The amount is entered in my books. Your ladyship is extremely
methodical, I am aware.”

“Let us now turn to another subject,” said Madame de Belliere; and she
opened one of her jewel-boxes.

“I recognize these emeralds,” said M. Faucheux; “for it was I who had
the setting of them. They are the most beautiful in the whole court. No,
I am mistaken; Madame de Chatillon has the most beautiful set; she had
them from Messieurs de Guise; but your set, madame, comes next.”

“What are they worth?”

“Mounted?”

“No; supposing I wished to sell them.”

“I know very well who would buy them,” exclaimed M. Faucheux.

“That is the very thing I ask. They could be sold, then?”

“All your jewels could be sold, madame. It is well known that you
possess the most beautiful jewels in Paris. You are not changeable in
your tastes; when you make a purchase it is of the very best; and what
you purchase you do not part with.”

“What could these emeralds be sold for, then?”

“A hundred and thirty thousand francs.”

The marquise wrote down upon her tablets the amount which the jeweler
mentioned. “The ruby necklace?” she said.

“Are they balas-rubies, madame?”

“Here they are.”

“They are beautiful--magnificent. I did not know your ladyship had these
stones.”

“What is their value?”

“Two hundred thousand francs. The center one is alone worth a hundred
thousand.”

“I thought so,” said the marquise. “As for diamonds, I have them in
numbers; rings, necklaces, sprigs, ear-rings, clasps. Tell me their
value, M. Faucheux.”

The jeweler took his magnifying-glass and scales, weighed and inspected
them, and silently made his calculations. “These stones,” he said, “must
have cost your ladyship an income of forty thousand francs.”

“You value them at eight hundred thousand francs?”

“Nearly so.”

“It is about what I imagined--but the settings are not included?”

“No, madame; but if I were called upon to sell or to buy, I should be
satisfied with the gold of the settings alone as my profit upon the
transaction. I should make a good twenty-five thousand francs.”

“An agreeable sum.”

“Very much so, madame.”

“Will you then accept that profit, then, on condition of converting the
jewels into money?”

“But you do not intend to sell you diamonds, I suppose, madame?”
 exclaimed the bewildered jeweler.

“Silence, M. Faucheux, do not disturb yourself about that; give me an
answer simply. You are an honorable man, with whom my family has dealt
for thirty years; you knew my father and mother, whom your own father
and mother served. I address you as a friend; will you accept the gold
of the settings in return for a sum of ready money to be placed in my
hands?”

“Eight hundred thousand francs! it is enormous.”

“I know it.”

“Impossible to find.”

“Not so.”

“But reflect, madame, upon the effect which will be produced by the sale
of your jewels.”

“No one need know it. You can get sets of false jewels made for me,
similar to the real. Do not answer a word; I insist upon it. Sell them
separately, sell the stones only.”

“In that way it is easy. Monsieur is looking out for some sets of
jewels as well as single stones for Madame’s toilette. There will be
a competition for them. I can easily dispose of six hundred thousand
francs’ worth to Monsieur. I am certain yours are the most beautiful.”

“When can you do so?”

“In less than three days’ time.”

“Very well, the remainder you will dispose of among private individuals.
For the present, make me out a contract of sale, payment to be made in
four days.”

“I entreat you to reflect, madame; for if you force the sale, you will
lose a hundred thousand francs.”

“If necessary, I will lose two hundred; I wish everything to be settled
this evening. Do you accept?”

“I do, your ladyship. I will not conceal from you that I shall make
fifty thousand francs by the transaction.”

“So much the better for you. In what way shall I have the money?”

“Either in gold, or in bills of the bank of Lyons, payable at M.
Colbert’s.”

“I agree,” said the marquise, eagerly; “return home and bring the sum in
question in notes, as soon as possible.”

“Yes, madame, but for Heaven’s sake--”

“Not a word, M. Faucheux. By the by, I was forgetting the silver plate.
What is the value of that which I have?”

“Fifty thousand francs, madame.”

“That makes a million,” said the marquise to herself. “M. Faucheux, you
will take away with you both the gold and silver plate. I can assign, as
a pretext, that I wish it remodeled on patters more in accordance with
my own taste. Melt it down, and return me its value in money, at once.”

“It shall be done, your ladyship.”

“You will be good enough to place the money in a chest, and direct one
of your clerks to accompany the chest, and without my servants seeing
him; and order him to wait for me in a carriage.”

“In Madame de Faucheux’s carriage?” said the jeweler.

“If you will allow it, and I will call for it at your house.”

“Certainly, your ladyship.”

“I will direct some of my servants to convey the plate to your house.”
 The marquise rung. “Let the small van be placed at M. Faucheux’s
disposal,” she said. The jeweler bowed and left the house, directing
that the van should follow him closely, saying aloud, that the marquise
was about to have her plate melted down in order to have other plate
manufactured of a more modern style. Three hours afterwards she went to
M. Faucheux’s house and received from him eight hundred francs in gold
inclosed in a chest, which one of the clerks could hardly carry towards
Madame Faucheux’s carriage--for Madame Faucheux kept her carriage. As
the daughter of a president of accounts, she had brought a marriage
portion of thirty thousand crowns to her husband, who was syndic of the
goldsmiths. These thirty thousand crowns had become very fruitful during
twenty years. The jeweler, though a _millionaire_, was a modest man. He
had purchased a substantial carriage, built in 1648, ten years after the
king’s birth. This carriage, or rather house upon wheels, excited the
admiration of the whole quarter in which he resided--it was covered
with allegorical paintings, and clouds scattered over with stars. The
marquise entered this somewhat extraordinary vehicle, sitting opposite
the clerk, who endeavored to put his knees out of the way, afraid even
of touching the marquise’s dress. It was the clerk, too, who told the
coachman, who was very proud of having a marquise to drive, to take the
road to Saint-Mande.



Chapter XXVIII. The Dowry.

Monsieur Faucheux’s horses were serviceable animals, with thickset knees
and legs that had some difficulty in moving. Like the carriage, they
belonged to the earlier part of the century. They were not as fleet as
the English horses of M. Fouquet, and consequently it took two hours
to get to Saint-Mande. Their progress, it might be said, was majestic.
Majesty, however, precludes hurry. The marquise stopped the carriage at
the door so well known to her, although she had seen it only once, under
circumstances, it will now be remembered, no less painful than those
which brought her now to it again. She drew a key from her pocket,
and inserted it into the lock, pushed open the door, which noiselessly
yielded to her touch, and directed the clerk to carry the chest upstairs
to the first floor. The weight of the chest was so great that the clerk
was obliged to get the coachman to assist him with it. They placed it
in a small cabinet, ante-room, or boudoir rather, adjoining the saloon
where we once saw M. Fouquet at the marquise’s feet. Madame de Belliere
gave the coachman a louis, smiled gracefully at the clerk, and dismissed
them both. She closed the door after them, and waited in the room, alone
and barricaded. There was no servant to be seen about the rooms, but
everything was prepared as though some invisible genius had divined the
wishes and desires of an expected guest. The fire was laid, candles
in the candelabra, refreshments upon the table, books scattered about,
fresh-cut flowers in the vases. One might almost have imagined it an
enchanted house.

The marquise lighted the candles, inhaled the perfume of the flowers,
sat down, and was soon plunged in profound thought. Her deep musings,
melancholy though they were, were not untinged with a certain vague joy.
Spread out before her was a treasure, a million wrung from her fortune
as a gleaner plucks the blue corn-flower from her crown of flowers. She
conjured up the sweetest dreams. Her principal thought, and one that
took precedence of all others, was to devise means of leaving this money
for M. Fouquet without his possibly learning from whom the gift had
come. This idea, naturally enough, was the first to present itself to
her mind. But although, on reflection, it appeared difficult to carry
out, she did not despair of success. She would then ring to summon M.
Fouquet and make her escape, happier than if, instead of having given
a million, she had herself found one. But, being there, and having seen
the boudoir so coquettishly decorated that it might almost be said the
least particle of dust had but the moment before been removed by the
servants; having observed the drawing-room, so perfectly arranged that
it might almost be said her presence there had driven away the fairies
who were its occupants, she asked herself if the glance or gaze of
those whom she had displaced--whether spirits, fairies, elves, or human
creatures--had not already recognized her. To secure success, it
was necessary that some steps should be seriously taken, and it was
necessary also that the superintendent should comprehend the serious
position in which he was placed, in order to yield compliance with
the generous fancies of a woman; all the fascinations of an eloquent
friendship would be required to persuade him, and, should this be
insufficient, the maddening influence of a devoted passion, which, in
its resolute determination to carry conviction, would not be turned
aside. Was not the superintendent, indeed, known for his delicacy and
dignity of feeling? Would he allow himself to accept from any woman that
of which she had stripped herself? No! He would resist, and if any voice
in the world could overcome his resistance, it would be the voice of the
woman he loved.

Another doubt, and that a cruel one, suggested itself to Madame de
Belliere with a sharp, acute pain, like a dagger thrust. Did he really
love her? Would that volatile mind, that inconstant heart, be likely to
be fixed for a moment, even were it to gaze upon an angel? Was it not
the same with Fouquet, notwithstanding his genius and his uprightness of
conduct, as with those conquerors on the field of battle who shed tears
when they have gained a victory? “I must learn if it be so, and must
judge of that for myself,” said the marquise. “Who can tell whether that
heart, so coveted, is not common in its impulses, and full of alloy? Who
can tell if that mind, when the touchstone is applied to it, will not
be found of a mean and vulgar character? Come, come,” she said, “this
is doubting and hesitation too much--to the proof,” she said, looking
at the timepiece. “It is now seven o’clock,” she said; “he must have
arrived; it is the hour for signing his papers.” With a feverish
impatience she rose and walked towards the mirror, in which she smiled
with a resolute smile of devotedness; she touched the spring and drew
out the handle of the bell. Then, as if exhausted beforehand by the
struggle she had just undergone, she threw herself on her knees, in
utter abandonment, before a large couch, in which she buried her face in
her trembling hands. Ten minutes afterwards she heard the spring of the
door sound. The door moved upon invisible hinges, and Fouquet appeared.
He looked pale, and seemed bowed down by the weight of some bitter
reflection. He did not hurry, but simply came at the summons. The
preoccupation of his mind must indeed have been very great, that a
man, so devoted to pleasure, for whom indeed pleasure meant everything,
should obey such a summons so listlessly. The previous night, in fact,
fertile in melancholy ideas, had sharpened his features, generally so
noble in their indifference of expression, and had traced dark lines
of anxiety around his eyes. Handsome and noble he still was, and the
melancholy expression of his mouth, a rare expression with men, gave a
new character to his features, by which his youth seemed to be renewed.
Dressed in black, the lace in front of his chest much disarranged by
his feverishly restless hand, the looks of the superintendent, full of
dreamy reflection, were fixed upon the threshold of the room which
he had so frequently approached in search of expected happiness. This
gloomy gentleness of manner, this smiling sadness of expression, which
had replaced his former excessive joy, produced an indescribable effect
upon Madame de Belliere, who was regarding him at a distance.

A woman’s eye can read the face of the man she loves, its every feeling
of pride, its every expression of suffering; it might almost be said
that Heaven has graciously granted to women, on account of their very
weakness, more than it has accorded to other creatures. They can conceal
their own feelings from a man, but from them no man can conceal his. The
marquise divined in a single glace the whole weight of the unhappiness
of the superintendent. She divined a night passed without sleep, a day
passed in deceptions. From that moment she was firm in her own strength,
and she felt that she loved Fouquet beyond everything else. She arose
and approached him, saying, “You wrote to me this morning to say you
were beginning to forget me, and that I, whom you had not seen lately,
had no doubt ceased to think of you. I have come to undeceive you,
monsieur, and the more completely so, because there is one thing I can
read in your eyes.”

“What is that, madame?” said Fouquet, astonished.

“That you have never loved me so much as at this moment; in the same
manner you can read, in my present step towards you, that I have not
forgotten you.”

“Oh! madame,” said Fouquet, whose face was for a moment lighted up by
a sudden gleam of joy, “you are indeed an angel, and no man can
suspect you. All he can do is to humble himself before you and entreat
forgiveness.”

“Your forgiveness is granted, then,” said the marquise. Fouquet was
about to throw himself upon his knees. “No, no,” she said, “sit here by
my side. Ah! that is an evil thought which has just crossed your mind.”

“How do you detect it, madame?”

“By the smile that has just marred the expression of your countenance.
Be candid, and tell me what your thought was--no secrets between
friends.”

“Tell me, then, madame, why you have been so harsh these three or four
months past?”

“Harsh?”

“Yes; did you not forbid me to visit you?”

“Alas!” said Madame de Belliere, sighing, “because your visit to me
was the cause of your being visited with a great misfortune; because my
house is watched; because the same eyes that have seen you already might
see you again; because I think it less dangerous for you that I should
come here than that you should come to my house; and, lastly, because
I know you to be already unhappy enough not to wish to increase your
unhappiness further.”

Fouquet started, for these words recalled all the anxieties connected
with his office of superintendent--he who, for the last few minutes, had
indulged in all the wild aspirations of the lover. “I unhappy?” he said,
endeavoring to smile: “indeed, marquise, you will almost make me believe
I am so, judging from your own sadness. Are your beautiful eyes raised
upon me merely in pity? I was looking for another expression from them.”

“It is not I who am sad, monsieur; look in the mirror, there--it is
yourself.”

“It is true I am somewhat pale, marquise; but it is from overwork; the
king yesterday required a supply of money from me.”

“Yes, four millions; I am aware of it.”

“You know it?” exclaimed Fouquet, in a tone of surprise; “how can you
have learnt it? It was after the departure of the queen, and in the
presence of one person only, that the king--”

“You perceive that I do know it; is that not sufficient? Well, go on,
monsieur, the money the king has required you to supply--”

“You understand, marquise, that I have been obliged to procure it, then
to get it counted, afterwards registered--altogether a long affair.
Since Monsieur de Mazarin’s death, financial affairs occasion some
little fatigue and embarrassment. My administration is somewhat
overtaxed, and this is the reason why I have not slept during the past
night.”

“So you have the amount?” inquired the marquise, with some anxiety.

“It would indeed be strange, marquise,” replied Fouquet, cheerfully, “if
a superintendent of finances were not to have a paltry four millions in
his coffers.”

“Yes, yes, I believe you either have, or will have them.”

“What do you mean by saying I shall have them?”

“It is not very long since you were required to furnish two millions.”

“On the contrary, it seems almost an age; but do not let us talk of
money matters any longer.”

“On the contrary, we will continue to speak of them, for that is my only
reason for coming to see you.”

“I am at a loss to compass your meaning,” said the superintendent, whose
eyes began to express an anxious curiosity.

“Tell me, monsieur, is the office of superintendent a permanent
position?”

“You surprise me, marchioness, for you speak as if you had some motive
or interest in putting the question.”

“My reason is simple enough; I am desirous of placing some money in your
hands, and naturally I wish to know if you are certain of your post.”

“Really, marquise, I am at a loss what to reply; I cannot conceive your
meaning.”

“Seriously, then, dear M. Fouquet, I have certain funds which somewhat
embarrass me. I am tired of investing my money in lands, and am anxious
to intrust it to some friend who will turn it to account.”

“Surely it does not press,” said M. Fouquet.

“On the contrary, it is very pressing.”

“Very well, we will talk of that by and by.”

“By and by will not do, for my money is there,” returned the marquise,
pointing out the coffer to the superintendent, and showing him, as she
opened it, the bundles of notes and heaps of gold. Fouquet, who had
risen from his seat at the same moment as Madame de Belliere, remained
for a moment plunged in thought; then suddenly starting back, he turned
pale, and sank down in his chair, concealing his face in his hands.
“Madame, madame,” he murmured, “what opinion can you have of me, when
you make me such an offer?”

“Of you!” returned the marquise. “Tell me, rather, what you yourself
think of the step I have taken.”

“You bring me this money for myself, and you bring it because you know
me to be embarrassed. Nay, do not deny it, for I am sure of it. Can I
not read your heart?”

“If you know my heart, then, can you not see that it is my heart I offer
you?”

“I have guessed rightly, then,” exclaimed Fouquet. “In truth, madame, I
have never yet given you the right to insult me in this manner.”

“Insult you,” she said, turning pale, “what singular delicacy of
feeling! You tell me you love me; in the name of that affection you wish
me to sacrifice my reputation and my honor, yet, when I offer you money
which is my own, you refuse me.”

“Madame, you are at liberty to preserve what you term your reputation
and your honor. Permit me to preserve mine. Leave me to my ruin, leave
me to sink beneath the weight of the hatreds which surround me, beneath
the faults I have committed, beneath the load, even, of my remorse,
but, for Heaven’s sake, madame, do not overwhelm me with this last
infliction.”

“A short time since, M. Fouquet, you were wanting in judgment; now you
are wanting in feeling.”

Fouquet pressed his clenched hand upon his breast, heaving with emotion,
saying: “overwhelm me, madame, for I have nothing to reply.”

“I offered you my friendship, M. Fouquet.”

“Yes, madame, and you limited yourself to that.”

“And what I am now doing is the act of a friend.”

“No doubt it is.”

“And you reject this mark of my friendship?”

“I do reject it.”

“Monsieur Fouquet, look at me,” said the marquise, with glistening eyes,
“I now offer you my love.”

“Oh, madame,” exclaimed Fouquet.

“I have loved you for a long while past; women, like men, have a false
delicacy at times. For a long time past I have loved you, but would not
confess it. Well, then, you have implored this love on your knees, and I
have refused you; I was blind, as you were a little while since; but as
it was my love that you sought, it is my love I now offer you.”

“Oh! madame, you overwhelm me beneath a load of happiness.”

“Will you be happy, then, if I am yours--entirely?”

“It will be the supremest happiness for me.”

“Take me, then. If, however, for your sake I sacrifice a prejudice, do
you, for mine, sacrifice a scruple.”

“Do not tempt me.”

“Do not refuse me.”

“Think seriously of what you are proposing.”

“Fouquet, but one word. Let it be ‘No,’ and I open this door,” and she
pointed to the door which led into the streets, “and you will never see
me again. Let that word be ‘Yes,’ and I am yours entirely.”

“Elise! Elise! But this coffer?”

“Contains my dowry.”

“It is your ruin,” exclaimed Fouquet, turning over the gold and papers;
“there must be a million here.”

“Yes, my jewels, for which I care no longer if you do not love me, and
for which, equally, I care no longer if you love me as I love you.”

“This is too much,” exclaimed Fouquet. “I yield, I yield, even were it
only to consecrate so much devotion. I accept the dowry.”

“And take the woman with it,” said the marquise, throwing herself into
his arms.



Chapter XXIX. Le Terrain de Dieu.

During the progress of these events Buckingham and De Wardes traveled
in excellent companionship, and made the journey from Paris to Calais in
undisturbed harmony together. Buckingham had hurried his departure, so
that the greater part of his _adieux_ were very hastily made. His visit
to Monsieur and Madame, to the young queen, and to the queen-dowager,
had been paid collectively--a precaution on the part of the queen-mother
which saved him the distress of any private conversation with Monsieur,
and also the danger of seeing Madame again. The carriages containing the
luggage had already been sent on beforehand, and in the evening he set
off in his traveling carriage with his attendants.

De Wardes, irritated at finding himself dragged away in so abrupt a
manner by this Englishman, had sought in his subtle mind for some
means of escaping from his fetters; but no one having rendered him any
assistance in this respect, he was absolutely obliged, therefore, to
submit to the burden of his own evil thoughts and caustic spirit.

Such of his friends in whom he had been able to confide, had, in their
character of wits, rallied him upon the duke’s superiority. Others,
less brilliant, but more sensible, had reminded him of the king’s orders
prohibiting dueling. Others, again, and they the larger number, who,
in virtue of charity, or national vanity, might have rendered him
assistance, did not care to run the risk of incurring disgrace, and
would, at the best, have informed the ministers of a departure which
might end in a massacre on a small scale. The result was, that, after
having fully deliberated upon the matter, De Wardes packed up his
luggage, took a couple of horses, and, followed only by one servant,
made his way towards the barrier, where Buckingham’s carriage was to
await him.

The duke received his adversary as he would have done an intimate
acquaintance, made room beside him on the same seat with himself,
offered him refreshments, and spread over his knees the sable cloak that
had been thrown on the front seat. They then conversed of the court,
without alluding to Madame; of Monsieur, without speaking of domestic
affairs; of the king, without speaking of his brother’s wife; of the
queen-mother, without alluding to her daughter-in-law; of the king of
England, without alluding to his sister; of the state of the affections
of either of the travelers, without pronouncing any name that might be
dangerous. In this way the journey, which was performed by short stages,
was most agreeable, and Buckingham, almost a Frenchman from wit and
education, was delighted at having so admirably selected his traveling
companion. Elegant repasts were served, of which they partook but
lightly; trials of horses made in the beautiful meadows that skirted the
road; coursing indulged in, for Buckingham had his greyhounds with him;
and in such ways did they pass away the pleasant time. The duke somewhat
resembled the beautiful river Seine, which folds France a thousand times
in its loving embrace, before deciding upon joining its waters with the
ocean. In quitting France, it was her recently adopted daughter he had
brought to Paris whom he chiefly regretted; his every thought was a
remembrance of her--his every memory a regret. Therefore, whenever, now
and then, despite his command over himself, he was lost in thought,
De Wardes left him entirely to his musings. This delicacy might have
touched Buckingham, and changed his feelings towards De Wardes, if
the latter, while preserving silence, had shown a glance less full
of malice, and a smile less false. Instinctive dislikes, however,
are relentless; nothing appeases them; a few ashes may, sometimes,
apparently, extinguish them; but beneath those ashes the smothered
embers rage more furiously. Having exhausted every means of amusement
the route offered, they arrived, as we have said, at Calais towards the
end of the sixth day. The duke’s attendants, since the previous evening,
had traveled in advance, and now chartered a boat, for the purpose
of joining the yacht, which had been tacking about in sight, or
bore broadside on, whenever it felt its white wings wearied, within
cannon-shot of the jetty.

The boat was destined for the transport of the duke’s equipages from the
shore to the yacht. The horses had been embarked, having been hoisted
from the boat upon the deck in baskets, expressly made for the purpose,
and wadded in such a manner that their limbs, even in the most violent
fits of terror or impatience, were always protected by the soft support
which the sides afforded, and their coats not even turned. Eight of
these baskets, placed side by side, filled the ship’s hold. It is well
known that, in short voyages horses refuse to eat, but remain trembling
all the while, with the best of food before them, such as they would
have greatly coveted on land. By degrees, the duke’s entire equipage was
transported on board the yacht; he was then informed that everything was
in readiness, and that they only waited for him, whenever he would be
disposed to embark with the French gentleman; for no one could possibly
imagine that the French gentleman would have any other accounts to
settle with his Grace other than those of friendship. Buckingham desired
the captain to be told to hold himself in readiness, but that, as the
sea was beautiful, and as the day promised a splendid sunset, he did not
intend to go on board until nightfall, and would avail himself of the
evening to enjoy a walk on the strand. He added also, that, finding
himself in such excellent company, he had not the least desire to hasten
his embarkation.

As he said this he pointed out to those who surrounded him the
magnificent spectacle which the sky presented, of deepest azure in the
horizon, the amphitheatre of fleecy clouds ascending from the sun’s disc
to the zenith, assuming the appearance of a range of snowy mountains,
whose summits were heaped one upon another. The dome of clouds was
tinged at its base with, as it were, the foam of rubies, fading away
into opal and pearly tints, in proportion as the gaze was carried from
base to summit. The sea was gilded with the same reflection, and upon
the crest of every sparkling wave danced a point of light, like a
diamond by lamplight. The mildness of the evening, the sea breezes, so
dear to contemplative minds, setting in from the east and blowing in
delicious gusts; then, in the distance, the black outline of the yacht
with its rigging traced upon the empurpled background of the sky--while,
dotting the horizon, might be seen, here and there, vessels with their
trimmed sails, like the wings of a seagull about to plunge; such a
spectacle indeed well merited admiration. A crowd of curious idlers
followed the richly dressed attendants, amongst whom they mistook
the steward and the secretary for the master and his friend. As for
Buckingham, who was dressed very simply, in a gray satin vest, and
doublet of violet-colored velvet, wearing his hat thrust over his eyes,
and without orders or embroidery, he was taken no more notice of than De
Wardes, who was in black, like an attorney.

The duke’s attendants had received directions to have a boat in
readiness at the jetty head, and to watch the embarkation of their
master, without approaching him until either he or his friend should
summon them,--“whatever may happen,” he had added, laying a stress upon
these words, so that they might not be misunderstood. Having walked a
few paces upon the strand, Buckingham said to De Wardes, “I think it is
now time to take leave of each other. The tide, you perceive, is rising;
ten minutes hence it will have soaked the sands where we are now walking
in such a manner that we shall not be able to keep our footing.”

“I await your orders, my lord, but--”

“But, you mean, we are still upon soil which is part of the king’s
territory.”

“Exactly.”

“Well, do you see yonder a kind of little island surrounded by a circle
of water? The pool is increasing every minute, and the isle is gradually
disappearing. This island, indeed, belongs to Heaven, for it is situated
between two seas, and is not shown on the king’s charts. Do you observe
it?”

“Yes; but we can hardly reach it now, without getting our feet wet.”

“Yes; but observe that it forms an eminence tolerably high, and that the
tide rises up on every side, leaving the top free. We shall be admirably
placed upon that little theatre. What do you think of it?”

“I shall be perfectly happy wherever I may have the honor of crossing my
sword with your lordship’s.”

“Very well, then, I am distressed to be the cause of your wetting your
feet, M. de Wardes, but it is most essential you should be able to say
to the king: ‘Sire, I did not fight upon your majesty’s territory.’
Perhaps the distinction is somewhat subtle, but, since Port-Royal, your
nation delights in subtleties of expression. Do not let us complain
of this, however, for it makes your wit very brilliant, and of a style
peculiarly your own. If you do not object, we will hurry ourselves, for
the sea, I perceive, is rising fast, and night is setting in.”

“My reason for not walking faster was, that I did not wish to precede
your Grace. Are you still on dry land, my lord?”

“Yes, at present I am. Look yonder! My servants are afraid we shall be
drowned, and have converted the boat into a cruiser. Do you remark how
curiously it dances upon the crests of the waves? But, as it makes me
feel sea-sick, would you permit me to turn my back towards them?”

“You will observe, my lord, that in turning your back to them, you will
have the sun full in your face.”

“Oh, its rays are very feeble at this hour and it will soon disappear;
do not be uneasy on that score.”

“As you please, my lord; it was out of consideration for your lordship
that I made the remark.”

“I am aware of that, M. de Wardes, and I fully appreciate your kindness.
Shall we take off our doublets?”

“As you please, my lord.”

“Do not hesitate to tell me, M. de Wardes, if you do not feel
comfortable upon the wet sand, or if you think yourself a little too
close to French territory. We could fight in England, or even upon my
yacht.”

“We are exceedingly well placed here, my lord; only I have the honor to
remark that, as the sea is rising fast, we have hardly time--”

Buckingham made a sign of assent, took off his doublet and threw it on
the ground, a proceeding which De Wardes imitated. Both their bodies,
which seemed like phantoms to those who were looking at them from the
shore, were thrown strongly into relief by a dark red violet-colored
shadow with which the sky became overspread.

“Upon my word, your Grace,” said De Wardes, “we shall hardly have time
to begin. Do you not perceive how our feet are sinking into the sand?”

“I have sunk up to the ankles,” said Buckingham, “without reckoning that
the water is even now breaking in upon us.”

“It has already reached me. As soon as you please, therefore, your
Grace,” said De Wardes, who drew his sword, a movement imitated by the
duke.

“M. de Wardes,” said Buckingham, “one final word. I am about to
fight you because I do not like you,--because you have wounded me in
ridiculing a certain devotional regard I have entertained, and one which
I acknowledge that, at this moment, I still retain, and for which I
would very willingly die. You are a bad and heartless man, M. de Wardes,
and I will do my very utmost to take your life; for I feel assured that,
if you survive this engagement, you will, in the future, work great
mischief towards my friends. That is all I have to remark, M. de
Wardes,” concluded Buckingham as he saluted him.

“And I, my lord, have only this to reply to you: I have not disliked you
hitherto, but, since you give me such a character, I hate you, and will
do all I possibly can to kill you;” and De Wardes saluted Buckingham.

Their swords crossed at the same moment, like two flashes of lightning
on a dark night. The swords seemed to seek each other, guessed their
position, and met. Both were practiced swordsmen, and the earlier passes
were without any result. The night was fast closing in, and it was so
dark that they attacked and defended themselves almost instinctively.
Suddenly De Wardes felt his word arrested,--he had just touched
Buckingham’s shoulder. The duke’s sword sunk, as his arm was lowered.

“You are wounded, my lord,” said De Wardes, drawing back a step or two.

“Yes, monsieur, but only slightly.”

“Yet you quitted your guard.”

“Only from the first effect of the cold steel, but I have recovered.
Let us go on, if you please.” And disengaging his sword with a sinister
clashing of the blade, the duke wounded the marquis in the breast.

“A hit?” he said.

“No,” cried De Wardes, not moving from his place.

“I beg your pardon, but observing that your shirt was stained--” said
Buckingham.

“Well,” said De Wardes furiously, “it is now your turn.”

And with a terrible lunge, he pierced Buckingham’s arm, the sword
passing between the two bones. Buckingham feeling his right arm
paralyzed, stretched out his left, seized his sword, which was about
falling from his nerveless grasp, and before De Wardes could resume his
guard, he thrust him through the breast. De Wardes tottered, his knees
gave way beneath him, and leaving his sword still fixed in the duke’s
arm, he fell into the water, which was soon crimsoned with a more
genuine reflection than that which it had borrowed from the clouds. De
Wardes was not dead; he felt the terrible danger that menaced him, for
the sea rose fast. The duke, too, perceived the danger. With an effort
and an exclamation of pain he tore out the blade which remained in his
arm, and turning towards De Wardes said, “Are you dead, marquis?”

“No,” replied De Wardes, in a voice choked by the blood which rushed
from his lungs to his throat, “but very near it.”

“Well, what is to be done; can you walk?” said Buckingham, supporting
him on his knee.

“Impossible,” he replied. Then falling down again, said, “call to your
people, or I shall be drowned.”

“Halloa! boat there! quick, quick!”

The boat flew over the waves, but the sea rose faster than the boat
could approach. Buckingham saw that De Wardes was on the point of being
again covered by a wave; he passed his left arm, safe and unwounded,
round his body and raised him up. The wave ascended to his waist,
but did not move him. The duke immediately began to carry his late
antagonist towards the shore. He had hardly gone ten paces, when a
second wave, rushing onwards higher, more furious and menacing than the
former, struck him at the height of his chest, threw him over and buried
him beneath the water. At the reflux, however, the duke and De Wardes
were discovered lying on the strand. De Wardes had fainted. At this
moment four of the duke’s sailors, who comprehended the danger, threw
themselves into the sea, and in a moment were close beside him. Their
terror was extreme when they observed how their master became covered
with blood, in proportion to the water, with which it was impregnated,
flowed towards his knees and feet; they wished to carry him.

“No, no,” exclaimed the duke, “take the marquis on shore first.”

“Death to the Frenchman!” cried the English sullenly.

“Wretched knaves!” exclaimed the duke, drawing himself up with a haughty
gesture, which sprinkled them with blood, “obey directly! M. de Wardes
on shore! M. de Wardes’s safety to be looked to first, or I will have
you all hanged!”

The boat had by this time reached them; the secretary and steward leaped
into the sea, and approached the marquis, who no longer showed any sign
of life.

“I commit him to your care, as you value your lives,” said the duke.
“Take M. de Wardes on shore.” They took him in their arms, and carried
him to the dry sand, where the tide never rose so high. A few idlers
and five or six fishermen had gathered on the shore, attracted by the
strange spectacle of two men fighting with the water up to their knees.
The fishermen, observing a group of men approaching carrying a wounded
man, entered the sea until the water was up to their waists. The English
transferred the wounded man to them, at the very moment the latter began
to open his eyes again. The salt water and the fine sand had got into
his wounds, and caused him the acutest pain. The duke’s secretary drew
out a purse filled with gold from his pocket, and handed it to the one
among those present who appeared of most importance, saying: “From my
master, his Grace the Duke of Buckingham, in order that every possible
care may be taken of the Marquis de Wardes.”

Then, followed by those who had accompanied him, he returned to the
boat, which Buckingham had been enabled to reach with the greatest
difficulty, but only after he had seen De Wardes out of danger. By this
time it was high tide; embroidered coats, and silk sashes were lost;
many hats, too, had been carried away by the waves. The flow of the tide
had borne the duke’s and De Wardes’s clothes to the shore, and De Wardes
was wrapped in the duke’s doublet, under the belief that it was his own,
when the fishermen carried him in their arms towards the town.



Chapter XXX. Threefold Love.

As soon as Buckingham departed, Guiche imagined the coast would be
perfectly clear for him without any interference. Monsieur, who no
longer retained the slightest feeling of jealousy, and who, besides,
permitted himself to be monopolized by the Chevalier de Lorraine,
allowed as much liberty and freedom in his house as the most exacting
could desire. The king, on his side, who had conceived a strong
predilection for his sister-in-law’s society, invented a variety of
amusements, in quick succession to each other, in order to render her
residence in Paris as cheerful as possible, so that in fact, not a day
passed without a ball at the Palais Royal, or a reception in Monsieur’s
apartments. The king had directed that Fontainebleau should be prepared
for the reception of the court, and every one was using his utmost
interest to get invited. Madame led a life of incessant occupation;
neither her voice nor her pen were idle for a moment. The conversations
with De Guiche were gradually assuming a tone of interest which might
unmistakably be recognized as the prelude of a deep-seated attachment.
When eyes look languishingly while the subject under discussion happens
to be colors of materials for dresses; when a whole hour is occupied in
analyzing the merits and the perfume of a _sachet_ or a flower;--there
are words in this style of conversation which every one might listen to,
but there are gestures and sighs that every one cannot perceive. After
Madame had talked for some time with De Guiche, she conversed with
the king, who paid her a visit regularly every day. They played, wrote
verses, or selected mottoes or emblematical devices; this spring was
not only the Maytide of nature, it was the youth of an entire people, of
which those at court were the head. The king was handsome, young, and of
unequaled gallantry. All women were passionately loved by him, even the
queen, his wife. This mighty monarch was, however, more timid and more
reserved than any other person in the kingdom, to such a degree, indeed,
that he did not confess his sentiments even to himself. This timidity of
bearing restrained him within the limits of ordinary politeness, and no
woman could boast of having any preference shown her beyond that shown
to others. It might be foretold that the day when his real character
would be displayed would be the dawn of a new sovereignty; but as yet
he had not declared himself. M. de Guiche took advantage of this, and
constituted himself the sovereign prince of the whole laughter-loving
court. It had been reported that he was on the best of terms with
Mademoiselle de Montalais; that he had been assiduously attentive to
Mademoiselle de Chatillon; but now he was not even barely civil to any
of the court beauties. He had eyes and ears for one person alone. In
this manner, and, as it were, without design, he devoted himself to
Monsieur, who had a great regard for him, and kept him as much as
possible in his own apartments. Unsociable from natural disposition, he
had estranged himself too much previous to the arrival of Madame,
but, after her arrival, he did not estrange himself sufficiently. This
conduct, which every one had observed, had been particularly remarked
by the evil genius of the house, the Chevalier de Lorraine, for whom
Monsieur exhibited the warmest attachment because he was of a very
cheerful disposition, even in his remarks most full of malice, and
because he was never at a loss how to wile the time away. The Chevalier
de Lorraine, therefore, having noticed that he was threatened with being
supplanted by De Guiche, resorted to strong measures. He disappeared
from the court, leaving Monsieur much embarrassed. The first day of his
absence, Monsieur hardly inquired about him, for he had De Guiche with
him, and, except that the time given to conversation with Madame, his
days and nights were rigorously devoted to the prince. On the second
day, however, Monsieur, finding no one near him, inquired where the
chevalier was. He was told that no one knew.

De Guiche, after having spent the morning in selecting embroideries and
fringes with Madame, went to console the prince. But after dinner,
as there were some amethysts to be looked at, De Guiche returned to
Madame’s cabinet. Monsieur was left quite to himself during the time
devoted to dressing and decorating himself; he felt that he was the most
miserable of men, and again inquired whether there was any news of the
chevalier, in reply to which he was told that no one could tell
where the chevalier was to be found. Monsieur, hardly knowing in what
direction to inflict his weariness, went to Madame’s apartments dressed
in his morning-gown. He found a large assemblage of people there,
laughing and whispering in every part of the room; at one end, a group
of women around one of the courtiers, talking together, amid smothered
bursts of laughter; at the other end, Manicamp and Malicorne were being
pillaged at cards by Montalais and Mademoiselle de Tonnay-Charente,
while two others were standing by, laughing. In another part were
Madame, seated upon some cushions on the floor, and De Guiche, on his
knees beside her, spreading out a handful of pearls and precious stones,
while the princess, with her white and slender fingers pointed out such
among them as pleased her the most. Again, in another corner of the
room, a guitar player was playing some of the Spanish seguedillas, to
which Madame had taken the greatest fancy ever since she had heard them
sung by the young queen with a melancholy expression of voice. But the
songs which the Spanish princess had sung with tears in her eyes, the
young Englishwoman was humming with a smile that well displayed her
beautiful teeth. The cabinet presented, in fact, the most perfect
representation of unrestrained pleasure and amusement. As he entered,
Monsieur was struck at beholding so many persons enjoying themselves
without him. He was so jealous at the sight that he could not resist
exclaiming, like a child, “What! you are amusing yourselves here, while
I am sick and tired of being alone!”

The sound of his voice was like a clap of thunder coming to interrupt
the warbling of birds under the leafy covert of the trees; a dead
silence ensued. De Guiche was on his feet in a moment. Malicorne tried
to hide himself behind Montalais. Manicamp stood bolt upright, and
assumed a very ceremonious demeanor. The guitar player thrust his
instrument under a table, covering it with a piece of carpet to conceal
it from the prince’s observation. Madame was the only one who did
not move, and smiling at her husband, said, “Is not this the hour you
usually devote to your toilette?”

“An hour which others select, it seems, for amusing themselves,” replied
the prince, grumblingly.

This untoward remark was the signal for a general rout; the women fled
like a flock of terrified starlings; the guitar player vanished like a
shadow; Malicorne, still protected by Montalais, who purposely widened
out her dress, glided behind the hanging tapestry. As for Manicamp, he
went to the assistance of De Guiche, who naturally remained near Madame,
and both of them, with the princess herself, courageously sustained the
attack. The count was too happy to bear malice against the husband;
but Monsieur bore a grudge against his wife. Nothing was wanting but a
quarrel; he sought it, and the hurried departure of the crowd, which had
been so joyous before he arrived, and was so disturbed by his entrance,
furnished him with a pretext.

“Why do they run away at the very sight of me?” he inquired, in a
supercilious tone; to which remark Madame replied, that, “whenever the
master of the house made his appearance, the family kept aloof out of
respect.” As she said this, she made so funny and so pretty a grimace,
that De Guiche and Manicamp could not control themselves; they burst
into a peal of laugher; Madame followed their example, and even Monsieur
himself could not resist it, and he was obliged to sit down, as, for
laughing, he could scarcely keep his equilibrium. However, he very soon
left off, but his anger had increased. He was still more furious because
he had permitted himself to laugh, than from having seen others laugh.
He looked at Manicamp steadily, not venturing to show his anger towards
De Guiche; but, at a sign which displayed no little amount of annoyance,
Manicamp and De Guiche left the room, so that Madame, left alone,
began sadly to pick up her pearls and amethysts, no longer smiling, and
speaking still less.

“I am very happy,” said the duke, “to find myself treated as a stranger
here, Madame,” and he left the room in a passion. On his way out, he met
Montalais, who was in attendance in the ante-room. “It is very agreeable
to pay you a visit here, but outside the door.”

Montalais made a very low obeisance. “I do not quite understand what
your royal highness does me the honor to say.”

“I say that when you are all laughing together in Madame’s apartment, he
is an unwelcome visitor who does not remain outside.”

“Your royal highness does not think, and does not speak so, of
yourself?”

“On the contrary, it is on my own account that I do speak and think. I
have no reason, certainly, to flatter myself about the reception I meet
with here at any time. How is it that, on the very day there is music
and a little society in Madame’s apartments--in my own apartments,
indeed, for they are mine--on the very day that I wish to amuse myself a
little in my turn, every one runs away? Are they afraid to see me, that
they all take wing as soon as I appear? Is there anything wrong, then,
going on in my absence?”

“Yet nothing has been done to-day, monseigneur, which is not done every
day.”

“What! do they laugh like that every day?”

“Why, yes, monseigneur.”

“The same group of people simpering and the same singing and strumming
going on every day?”

“The guitar, monseigneur, was introduced to-day; but when we have no
guitars, we have violins and flutes; ladies soon weary without music.”

“The deuce!--and the men?”

“What men, monseigneur?”

“M. de Guiche, M. de Manicamp, and the rest of them?”

“They all belong to your highness’s household.”

“Yes, yes, you are right,” said the prince, as he returned to his own
apartments, full of thought. He threw himself into the largest of his
arm-chairs, without looking at himself in the glass. “Where can the
chevalier be?” said he. One of the prince’s attendants happened to be
near him, overheard his remark, and replied,--

“No one knows, your highness.”

“Still the same answer. The first one who answers me again, ‘I do not
know,’ I will discharge.” Every one at this remark hurried out of his
apartments, in the same manner as the others had fled from Madame’s
apartments. The prince then flew into the wildest rage. He kicked over
a chiffonier, which tumbled on the carpet, broken into pieces. He next
went into the galleries, and with the greatest coolness threw down,
one after another, an enameled vase, a porphyry ewer, and a bronze
candelabrum. The noise summoned every one to the various doors.

“What is your highness’s pleasure?” said the captain of the guards,
timidly.

“I am treating myself to some music,” replied the prince, gnashing his
teeth.

The captain of the guards desired his royal highness’s physician to be
sent for. But before he came, Malicorne arrived, saying to the prince,
“Monseigneur, the Chevalier de Lorraine is here.”

The duke looked at Malicorne, and smiled graciously at him, just as the
chevalier entered.



Chapter XXXI. M. de Lorraine’s Jealousy.

The Duc d’Orleans uttered a cry of delight on perceiving the Chevalier
de Lorraine. “This is fortunate, indeed,” he said; “by what happy chance
do I see you? Had you indeed disappeared, as every one assured me?”

“Yes, monseigneur.”

“A caprice?”

“I to venture upon caprices with your highness! The respect--”

“Put respect out of the way, for you fail in it every day. I absolve
you; but why did you leave me?”

“Because I felt that I was of no further use to you.”

“Explain yourself.”

“Your highness has people about you who are far more amusing that _I_
can ever be. I felt I was not strong enough to enter into contest with
them, and I therefore withdrew.”

“This extreme diffidence shows a want of common sense. Who are those
with whom you cannot contend? De Guiche?”

“I name no one.”

“This is absurd. Does De Guiche annoy you?”

“I do not say he does; do not force me to speak, however; you know very
well that De Guiche is one of our best friends.”

“Who is it, then?”

“Excuse me, monseigneur, let us say no more about it.” The chevalier
knew perfectly well that curiosity is excited in the same way as thirst
--by removing that which quenches it; or in other words, by denying an
explanation.

“No, no,” said the prince; “I wish to know why you went away.”

“In that case, monseigneur, I will tell you; but do not get angry. I
remarked that my presence was disagreeable.”

“To whom?”

“To Madame.”

“What do you mean?” said the duke in astonishment.

“It is simple enough; Madame is very probably jealous of the regard you
are good enough to testify for me.”

“Has she shown it to you?”

“Madame never addresses a syllable to me, particularly since a certain
time.”

“Since _what_ time?”

“Since the time when, M. de Guiche having made himself more agreeable to
her than I could, she receives him at every and any hour.”

The duke colored. “At any hour, chevalier; what do you mean by that?”

“You see, your highness, I have already displeased you; I was quite sure
I should.”

“I am not displeased; but what you say is rather startling. In what
respect does Madame prefer De Guiche to you?”

“I shall say no more,” said the chevalier, saluting the prince
ceremoniously.

“On the contrary, I require you to speak. If you withdraw on that
account, you must indeed be very jealous.”

“One cannot help being jealous, monseigneur, when one loves. Is not your
royal highness jealous of Madame? Would you not, if you saw some one
always near Madame, and always treated with great favor, take umbrage
at it? One’s friends are as one’s lovers. Your highness has sometimes
conferred the distinguished honor upon me of calling me your friend.”

“Yes, yes,; but you used a phrase which has a very equivocal
significance; you are unfortunate in your phrases.”

“What phrase, monseigneur?”

“You said, ‘treated with great favor.’ What do you mean by favor?”

“Nothing can be more simple,” said the chevalier, with an expression of
great frankness; “for instance, whenever a husband remarks that his wife
summons such and such a man near her; whenever this man is always to
be found by her side, or in attendance at the door of her carriage;
whenever the bouquet of the one is always the same color as the
ribbons of the other; when music and supper parties are held in private
apartments; whenever a dead silence takes place immediately the husband
makes his appearance in his wife’s rooms; and when the husband suddenly
finds that he has, as a companion, the most devoted and the kindest
of men, who, a week before, was with him as little as possible; why,
then--”

“Well, finish.”

“Why, then, I say, monseigneur, one possibly may get jealous. But all
these details hardly apply; for our conversation had nothing to do with
them.”

The duke was evidently very much agitated, and seemed to struggle with
himself a good deal. “You have not told me,” he then remarked, “why you
absented yourself. A little while ago you said it was from a fear of
intruding; you added, even, that you had observed a disposition on
Madame’s part to encourage De Guiche.”

“Pardon me, monseigneur, I did not say that.”

“You did, indeed.”

“Well, if I did say so, I observed nothing but what was very
inoffensive.”

“At all events, you remarked something.”

“You embarrass me, monseigneur.”

“What does that matter? Answer me. If you speak the truth, why should
you feel embarrassed?”

“I always speak the truth, monseigneur; but I also always hesitate when
it is a question of repeating what others say.”

“Ah! repeat? It appears that it is talked about, then?”

“I acknowledge that others have spoken to me on the subject.”

“Who?” said the prince.

The chevalier assumed almost an angry air, as he replied, “Monseigneur,
you are subjecting me to cross-examination; you treat me as a criminal
at the bar; the rumors which idly pass by a gentleman’s ears do not
remain there. Your highness wishes me to magnify rumors until it attains
the importance of an event.”

“However,” said the duke, in great displeasure, “the fact remains that
you withdrew on account of this report.”

“To speak the truth, others have talked to me of the attentions of M. de
Guiche to Madame, nothing more; perfectly harmless, I repeat, and more
than that, allowable. But do not be unjust, monseigneur, and do not
attach any undue importance to it. It does not concern you.”

“M. de Guiche’s attentions to Madame do not concern me?”

“No, monseigneur; and what I say to you I would say to De Guiche
himself, so little do I think of the attentions he pays Madame. Nay,
I would say it even to Madame herself. Only you understand what I am
afraid of--I am afraid of being thought jealous of the favor shown,
when I am only jealous as far as friendship is concerned. I know your
disposition; I know that when you bestow your affections you become
exclusively attached. You love Madame--and who, indeed, would _not_ love
her? Follow me attentively as I proceed:--Madame has noticed among your
friends the handsomest and most fascinating of them all; she will begin
to influence you on his behalf in such a way that you will neglect the
others. Your indifference would kill me; it is already bad enough to
have to support Madame’s indifference. I have, therefore, made up my
mind to give way to the favorite whose happiness I envy, even while I
acknowledge my sincere friendship and sincere admiration for him. Well,
monseigneur, do you see anything to object to in this reasoning? Is
it not that of a man of honor? Is my conduct that of a sincere friend?
Answer me, at least, after having so closely questioned me.”

The duke had seated himself, with his head buried in his hands. After a
silence long enough to enable the chevalier to judge the effect of this
oratorical display, the duke arose, saying, “Come, be candid.”

“As I always am.”

“Very well. You know that we already observed something respecting that
mad fellow, Buckingham.”

“Do not say anything against Madame, monseigneur, or I shall take my
leave. It is impossible you can be suspicious of Madame?”

“No, no, chevalier; I do not suspect Madame; but in fact, I observe--I
compare--”

“Buckingham was a madman, monseigneur.”

“A madman about whom, however, you opened my eyes thoroughly.”

“No, no,” said the chevalier, quickly; “it was not I who opened your
eyes, it was De Guiche. Do not confound us, I beg.” And he began to
laugh in so harsh a manner that it sounded like the hiss of a serpent.

“Yes, yes; I remember. You said a few words, but De Guiche showed the
most jealousy.”

“I should think so,” continued the chevalier, in the same tone. “He was
fighting for home and altar.”

“What did you say?” said the duke, haughtily, thoroughly roused by this
insidious jest.

“Am I not right? for does not M. de Guiche hold the chief post of honor
in your household?”

“Well,” replied the duke, somewhat calmed, “had this passion of
Buckingham been remarked?”

“Certainly.”

“Very well. Do people say that M. de Guiche’s is remarked as much?”

“Pardon me, monseigneur; you are again mistaken; no one says that M. de
Guiche entertains anything of the sort.”

“Very good.”

“You see, monseigneur, that it would have been better, a hundred times
better, to have left me in my retirement, than to have allowed you to
conjure up, by aid of any scruples I may have had, suspicions which
Madame will regard as crimes, and she would be in the right, too.”

“What would you do?”

“Act reasonably.”

“In what way?”

“I should not pay the slightest attention to the society of these new
Epicurean philosophers; and, in that way, the rumors will cease.”

“Well, I will see; I will think it over.”

“Oh, you have time enough; the danger is not great; and then, besides,
it is not a question of danger or of passion. It all arose from a fear
I had to see your friendship for me decrease. From the very moment you
restore it, with so kind an assurance of its existence, I have no longer
any other idea in my head.”

The duke shook his head as if he meant to say: “If you have no more
ideas, I have, though.” It being now the dinner hour, the prince sent to
inform Madame of it; but she returned a message to the effect that she
could not be present, but would dine in her own apartment.

“That is not my fault,” said the duke. “This morning, having taken them
by surprise in the midst of a musical party, I got jealous; and so they
are in the sulks with me.”

“We will dine alone,” said the chevalier, with a sigh; “I regret De
Guiche is not here.”

“Oh! De Guiche will not remain long in the sulks; he is a very
good-natured fellow.”

“Monseigneur,” said the chevalier, suddenly, “an excellent idea has
struck me, in our conversation just now. I may have exasperated your
highness, and caused you some dissatisfaction. It is but fitting that I
should be the mediator. I will go and look for the count, and bring him
back with me.”

“Ah! chevalier, you are really a very good-natured fellow.”

“You say that as if you were surprised.”

“Well, you are not so tender-hearted every day.”

“That may be; but confess that I know how to repair a wrong I may have
done.”

“I confess that.”

“Will your highness do me the favor to wait here a few minutes?”

“Willingly; be off, and I will try on my Fontainebleau costume.”

The chevalier left the room, called his different attendant with the
greatest care, as if he were giving them different orders. All went
off in various directions; but he retained his _valet de chambre_.
“Ascertain, and immediately, too, of M. de Guiche is not in Madame’s
apartments. How can one learn it?”

“Very easily, monsieur. I will ask Malicorne, who will find out from
Mlle. de Montalais. I may as well tell you, however, that the inquiry
will be useless; for all M. de Guiche’s attendants are gone, and he must
have left with them.”

“Ascertain, nevertheless.”

Ten minutes had hardly passed, when the valet returned. He beckoned his
master mysteriously towards the servants’ staircase, and showed him into
a small room with a window looking out upon the garden. “What is the
matter?” said the chevalier; “why so many precautions?”

“Look, monsieur,” said the valet, “look yonder, under the walnut-tree.”

“Ah?” said the chevalier. “I see Manicamp there. What is he waiting
for?”

“You will see in a moment, monsieur, if you wait patiently. There, do
you see now?”

“I see one, two, four musicians with their instruments, and behind them,
urging them on, De Guiche himself. What is he doing there, though?”

“He is waiting until the little door of the staircase, belonging to the
ladies of honor, is opened; by that staircase he will ascend to Madame’s
apartments, where some new pieces of music are going to be performed
during dinner.”

“This is admirable news you tell me.”

“Is it not, monsieur?”

“Was it M. de Malicorne who told you this?”

“Yes, monsieur.”

“He likes you, then?”

“No, monsieur, it is Monsieur that he likes.”

“Why?”

“Because he wishes to belong to his household.”

“And most certainly he shall. How much did he give you for that?”

“The secret which I now dispose of to you, monsieur.”

“And which I buy for a hundred pistoles. Take them.”

“Thank you, monsieur. Look, look, the little door opens; a woman admits
the musicians.”

“It is Montalais.”

“Hush, monseigneur; do not call out her name; whoever says Montalais
says Malicorne. If you quarrel with the one, you will be on bad terms
with the other.”

“Very well; I have seen nothing.”

“And I,” said the valet, pocketing the purse, “have received nothing.”

The chevalier, being now certain that Guiche had entered, returned to
the prince, whom he found splendidly dressed and radiant with joy, as
with good looks. “I am told,” he exclaimed, “that the king has taken the
sun as his device; really, monseigneur, it is you whom this device would
best suit.”

“Where is De Guiche?”

“He cannot be found. He has fled--has evaporated entirely. Your scolding
of this morning terrified him. He could not be found in his apartments.”

“Bah! the hair-brained fellow is capable of setting off post-haste to
his own estates. Poor man! we will recall him. Come, let us dine now.”

“Monseigneur, to-day is a very festival of ideas; I have another.”

“What is it?”

“Madame is angry with you, and she has reason to be so. You owe her
revenge; go and dine with her.”

“Oh! that would be acting like a weak and whimsical husband.”

“It is the duty of a good husband to do so. The princess is no doubt
wearied enough; she will be weeping in her plate, and here eyes will get
quite red. A husband who is the cause of his wife’s eyes getting red is
an odious creature. Come, monseigneur, come.”

“I cannot; for I have directed dinner to be served here.”

“Yet see, monseigneur, how dull we shall be; I shall be low-spirited
because I know that Madame will be alone; you, hard and savage as you
wish to appear, will be sighing all the while. Take me with you to
Madame’s dinner, and that will be a delightful surprise. I am sure we
shall be very merry; you were in the wrong this morning.”

“Well, perhaps I was.”

“There is no perhaps at all, for it is a fact you were so.”

“Chevalier, chevalier, your advice is not good.”

“Nay, my advice is good; all the advantages are on your own side. Your
violet-colored suit, embroidered with gold, becomes you admirably.
Madame will be as much vanquished by the man as by the action. Come,
monseigneur.”

“You decide me; let us go.”

The duke left his room, accompanied by the chevalier and went towards
Madame’s apartments. The chevalier hastily whispered to the valet, “Be
sure there are some people before that little door, so that no one can
escape in that direction. Run, run!” And he followed the duke towards
the ante-chambers of Madame’s suite of apartments, and when the ushers
were about to announce them, the chevalier said, laughing, “His highness
wishes to surprise Madame.”



Chapter XXXII. Monsieur is Jealous of Guiche.

Monsieur entered the room abruptly, as persons do who mean well and
think they confer pleasure, or as those who hope to surprise some
secret, the terrible reward of jealous people. Madame, almost out of
her senses with joy at the first bars of music, was dancing in the most
unrestrained manner, leaving the dinner, which had been already begun,
unfinished. Her partner was M. de Guiche, who, with his arms raised,
and his eyes half closed, was kneeling on one knee, like the Spanish
dancers, with looks full of passion, and gestures of the most caressing
character. The princess was dancing round him with a responsive
smile, and the same air of alluring seductiveness. Montalais stood
by admiringly; La Valliere, seated in a corner of the room, looked on
thoughtfully. It is impossible to describe the effect which the presence
of the prince produced upon this gleeful company, and it would be
equally impossible to describe the effect which the sight of their
happiness produced upon Philip. The Comte de Guiche had no power to
move; Madame remained in the middle of one of the figures and of an
attitude, unable to utter a word. The Chevalier de Lorraine, leaning his
back against the doorway, smiled like a man in the very height of
the frankest admiration. The pallor of the prince, and the convulsive
twitching of his hands and limbs, were the first symptoms that struck
those present. A dead silence succeeded the merry music of the dance.
The Chevalier de Lorraine took advantage of this interval to salute
Madame and De Guiche most respectfully, affecting to join them together
in his reverences as though they were the master and mistress of the
house. Monsieur then approached them, saying, in a hoarse tone of voice,
“I am delighted; I came here expecting to find you ill and low-spirited,
and I find you abandoning yourself to new amusements; really, it is most
fortunate. My house is the pleasantest in the kingdom.” Then turning
towards De Guiche, “Comte,” he said, “I did not know you were so good
a dancer.” And, again addressing his wife, he said, “Show a little more
consideration for me, Madame; whenever you intend to amuse yourselves
here, invite me. I am a prince, unfortunately, very much neglected.”

Guiche had now recovered his self-possession, and with the spirited
boldness which was natural to him, and sat so well upon him, he said,
“Your highness knows very well that my very life is at your service,
and whenever there is a question of its being needed, I am ready; but
to-day, as it is only a question of dancing to music, I dance.”

“And you are perfectly right,” said the prince, coldly. “But, Madame,”
 he continued, “you do not remark that your ladies deprive me of my
friends; M. de Guiche does not belong to you, Madame, but to me. If you
wish to dine without me you have your ladies. When I dine alone I have
my gentlemen; do not strip me of _everything_.”

Madame felt the reproach and the lesson, and the color rushed to her
face. “Monsieur,” she replied, “I was not aware, when I came to the
court of France, that princesses of my rank were to be regarded as the
women in Turkey are. I was not aware that we were not allowed to be
seen; but, since such is your desire, I will conform myself to it;
pray do not hesitate, if you should wish it, to have my windows barred,
even.”

This repartee, which made Montalais and De Guiche smile, rekindled
the prince’s anger, no inconsiderable portion of which had already
evaporated in words.

“Very well,” he said, in a concentrated tone of voice, “this is the way
in which I am respected in my own house.”

“Monseigneur, monseigneur,” murmured the chevalier in the duke’s ear,
in such a manner that every one could observe he was endeavoring to calm
him.

“Come,” replied the prince, as his only answer to the remark, hurrying
him away, and turning round with so hasty a movement that he almost ran
against Madame. The chevalier followed him to his own apartment, where
the prince had no sooner seated himself than he gave free vent to his
fury. The chevalier raised his eyes towards the ceiling, joined his
hands together, and said not a word.

“Give me your opinion,” exclaimed the prince.

“Upon what?”

“Upon what is taking place here.”

“Oh, monseigneur, it is a very serious matter.”

“It is abominable! I cannot live in this manner.”

“How miserable all this is,” said the chevalier. “We hoped to enjoy
tranquillity after that madman Buckingham had left.”

“And this is worse.”

“I do not say that, monseigneur.”

“Yes, but I say it; for Buckingham would never have ventured upon a
fourth part of what we have just now seen.”

“What do you mean?”

“To conceal oneself for the purposes of dancing, and to feign
indisposition in order to dine _tete-a-tete_.”

“No, no, monseigneur.”

“Yes, yes,” exclaimed the prince, exciting himself like a self-willed
child; “but I will not endure it any longer, I must learn what is really
going on.”

“Oh, monseigneur, an exposure--”

“By Heaven, monsieur, _shall_ I put myself out of the way, when people
show so little consideration for me? Wait for me here, chevalier, wait
for me here.” The prince disappeared in the neighboring apartment and
inquired of the gentleman in attendance if the queen-mother had returned
from chapel.

Anne of Austria felt that her happiness was now complete; peace restored
to her family, a nation delighted with the presence of a young monarch
who had shown an aptitude for affairs of great importance; the revenues
of the state increased; external peace assured; everything seemed to
promise a tranquil future. Her thoughts recurred, now and then, to the
poor young nobleman whom she had received as a mother, and had driven
away as a hard-hearted step-mother, and she sighed as she thought of
him.

Suddenly the Duc d’Orleans entered her room. “Dear mother,” he exclaimed
hurriedly, closing the door, “things cannot go on as they are now.”

Anne of Austria raised her beautiful eyes towards him, and with an
unmoved suavity of manner, said, “What do you allude to?”

“I wish to speak of Madame.”

“Your wife?”

“Yes, madame.”

“I suppose that silly fellow Buckingham has been writing a farewell
letter to her.”

“Oh! yes, madame; of course, it is a question of Buckingham.”

“Of whom else could it be, then? for that poor fellow was, wrongly
enough, the object of your jealousy, and I thought--”

“My wife, madame, has already replaced the Duke of Buckingham.”

“Philip, what are you saying? You are speaking very heedlessly.”

“No, no. Madame has so managed matters, that I am still jealous.”

“Of whom, in Heaven’s name?”

“Is it possible you have not remarked it? Have you not noticed that M.
de Guiche is always in her apartments--always with her?”

The queen clapped her hands together, and began to laugh. “Philip,” she
said, “your jealousy is not merely a defect, it is a disease.”

“Whether a defect or a disease, madame, I am the sufferer from it.”

“And do you imagine that a complaint which exists only in your own
imagination can be cured? You wish it to be said you are right in being
jealous, when there is no ground whatever for your jealousy.”

“Of course, you will begin to say for this gentleman what you already
said on the behalf of the other.”

“Because, Philip,” said the queen dryly, “what you did for the other,
you are going to do for this one.”

The prince bowed, slightly annoyed. “If I give you facts,” he said,
“will you believe me?”

“If it regarded anything else but jealousy, I would believe you without
your bringing facts forward; but as jealousy is the case, I promise
nothing.”

“It is just the same as if your majesty were to desire me to hold my
tongue, and sent me away unheard.”

“Far from it; you are my son, I owe you a mother’s indulgence.”

“Oh, say what you think; you owe me as much indulgence as a madman
deserves.”

“Do not exaggerate, Philip, and take care how you represent your wife to
me as a woman of depraved mind--”

“But facts, mother, facts!”

“Well, I am listening.”

“This morning at ten o’clock they were playing music in Madame’s
apartments.”

“No harm in that, surely.”

“M. de Guiche was talking with her alone--Ah! I forgot to tell you,
that, during the last ten days, he has never left her side.”

“If they were doing any harm they would hide themselves.”

“Very good,” exclaimed the duke, “I expected you to say that. Pray
remember with precision the words you have just uttered. This morning
I took them by surprise, and showed my dissatisfaction in a very marked
manner.”

“Rely upon it, that is quite sufficient; it was, perhaps, even a little
too much. These young women easily take offense. To reproach them for
an error they have not committed is, sometimes, almost equivalent to
telling them they might be guilty of even worse.”

“Very good, very good; but wait a minute. Do not forget what you have
just this moment said, that this morning’s lesson ought to have been
sufficient, and that if they had been doing what was wrong, they would
have hidden themselves.”

“Yes, I said so.”

“Well, just now, repenting of my hastiness of the morning, and imagining
that Guiche was sulking in his own apartments, I went to pay Madame
a visit. Can you guess what, or whom, I found there? Another set of
musicians; more dancing, and Guiche himself--he was concealed there.”

Anne of Austria frowned. “It was imprudent,” she said. “What did Madame
say?”

“Nothing.”

“And Guiche?”

“As much--oh, no! he muttered some impertinent remark or another.”

“Well, what is your opinion, Philip?”

“That I have been made a fool of; that Buckingham was only a pretext,
and that Guiche is the one who is really to blame in the matter.”

Anne shrugged her shoulders. “Well,” she said, “what else?”

“I wish De Guiche to be dismissed from my household, as Buckingham was,
and I shall ask the king, unless--”

“Unless what?”

“Unless you, my dear mother, who are so clever and so kind, will execute
the commission yourself.”

“I will not do it, Philip.”

“What, madame?”

“Listen, Philip; I am not disposed to pay people ill compliments
every day; I have some influence over young people, but I cannot take
advantage of it without running the chances of losing it altogether.
Besides, there is nothing to prove that M. de Guiche is guilty.”

“He has displeased me.”

“That is your own affair.”

“Very well, I know what I shall do,” said the prince, impetuously.

Anne looked at him with some uneasiness. “What do you intend to do?” she
said.

“I will have him drowned in my fish-pond the very next time I find
him in my apartments again.” Having launched this terrible threat, the
prince expected his mother would be frightened out of her senses; but
the queen was unmoved.

“Do so,” she said.

Philip was as weak as a woman, and began to cry out, “Every one betrays
me,--no one cares for me; my mother, even, joins my enemies.”

“Your mother, Philip, sees further in the matter than you do, and does
not care about advising you, since you will not listen to her.”

“I will go to the king.”

“I was about to propose that to you. I am now expecting his majesty;
it is the hour he usually pays me a visit; explain the matter to him
yourself.”

She had hardly finished when Philip heard the door of the ante-room open
with some noise. He began to feel nervous. At the sound of the king’s
footsteps, which could be heard upon the carpet, the duke hurriedly made
his escape. Anne of Austria could not resist laughing, and was laughing
still when the king entered. He came very affectionately to inquire
after the even now uncertain health of the queen-mother, and to announce
to her that the preparations for the journey to Fontainebleau were
complete. Seeing her laugh, his uneasiness on her account diminished,
and he addressed her in a vivacious tone himself. Anne of Austria took
him by the hand, and, in a voice full of playfulness, said, “Do you
know, sire that I am proud of being a Spanish woman?”

“Why, madame?”

“Because Spanish women are worth more than English women at least.”

“Explain yourself.”

“Since your marriage you have not, I believe, had a single reproach to
make against the queen.”

“Certainly not.”

“And you, too, have been married some time. Your brother, on the
contrary, has been married but a fortnight.”

“Well?”

“He is now finding fault with Madame a second time.”

“What, Buckingham still?”

“No, another.”

“Who?”

“Guiche.”

“Really? Madame is a coquette, then?”

“I fear so.”

“My poor brother,” said the king, laughing.

“You don’t object to coquettes, it seems?”

“In Madame, certainly I do; but Madame is not a coquette at heart.”

“That may be, but your brother is excessively angry about it.”

“What does he want?”

“He wants to drown Guiche.”

“That is a violent measure to resort to.”

“Do not laugh; he is extremely irritated. Think of what can be done.”

“To save Guiche--certainly.”

“Of, if your brother heard you, he would conspire against you as your
uncle did against your father.”

“No; Philip has too much affection for me for that, and I, on my side,
have too great a regard for him; we shall live together on very good
terms. But what is the substance of his request?”

“That you will prevent Madame from being a coquette and Guiche from
being amiable.”

“Is that all? My brother has an exalted idea of sovereign power. To
reform a man, not to speak about reforming a woman!”

“How will you set about it?”

“With a word to Guiche, who is a clever fellow, I will undertake to
convince him.”

“But Madame?”

“That is more difficult; a word will not be enough. I will compose a
homily and read it to her.”

“There is no time to be lost.”

“Oh, I will use the utmost diligence. There is a repetition of the
ballet this afternoon.”

“You will read her a lecture while you are dancing?”

“Yes, madame.”

“You promise to convert her?”

“I will root out the heresy altogether, either by convincing her, or by
extreme measures.”

“That is all right, then. Do not mix me up in the affair; Madame would
never forgive me all her life, and as a mother-in-law, I ought to desire
to live on good terms with my new-found daughter.”

“The king, madame, will take all upon himself. But let me reflect.”

“What about?”

“It would be better, perhaps, if I were to go and see Madame in her own
apartment.”

“Would that not seem a somewhat serious step to take?”

“Yes; but seriousness is not unbecoming in preachers, and the music
of the ballet would drown half my arguments. Besides, the object is
to prevent any violent measures on my brother’s part, so that a little
precipitation may be advisable. Is Madame in her own apartment?”

“I believe so.”

“What is my statement of grievances to consist of?”

“In a few words, of the following: music uninterruptedly; Guiche’s
assiduity; suspicions of treasonable plots and practices.”

“And the proofs?”

“There _are_ none.”

“Very well; I will go at once to see Madame.” The king turned to look in
the mirrors at his costume, which was very rich, and his face, which
was radiant as the morning. “I suppose my brother is kept a little at a
distance,” said the king.

“Fire and water cannot be more opposite.”

“That will do. Permit me, madame, to kiss your hands, the most beautiful
hands in France.”

“May you be successful, sire, as the family peacemaker.”

“I do not employ an ambassador,” said Louis, “which is as much as to say
that I shall succeed.” He laughed as he left the room, and carelessly
adjusted his ruffles as he went along.



Chapter XXXIII. The Mediator.

When the king made his appearance in Madame’s apartments, the courtiers,
whom the news of a conjugal misunderstanding had dispersed through the
various apartments, began to entertain the most serious apprehensions. A
storm was brewing in that direction, the elements of which the Chevalier
de Lorraine, in the midst of the different groups, was analyzing with
delight, contributing to the weaker, and acting, according to his own
wicked designs, in such a manner with regard to the stronger, as to
produce the most disastrous consequences possible. As Anne of Austria
had herself said, the presence of the king gave a solemn and serious
character to the event. Indeed, in the year 1662, the dissatisfaction of
Monsieur with Madame, and the king’s intervention in the private affairs
of Monsieur, was a matter of no inconsiderable moment. [3]

The boldest, even, who had been the associates of the Comte de Guiche,
had, from the first moment, held aloof from him, with a sort of nervous
apprehension; and the comte himself, infected by the general panic,
retired to his own room. The king entered Madame’s private apartments,
acknowledging and returning the salutations, as he was always in the
habit of doing. The ladies of honor were ranged in a line on his passage
along the gallery. Although his majesty was very much preoccupied,
he gave the glance of a master at the two rows of young and beautiful
girls, who modestly cast down their eyes, blushing as they felt the
king’s gaze fall upon them. One only of the number, whose long hair fell
in silken masses upon the most beautiful skin imaginable, was pale,
and could hardly sustain herself, notwithstanding the knocks which her
companion gave her with her elbow. It was La Valliere whom Montalais
supported in that manner by whispering some of that courage to her with
which she herself was so abundantly provided. The king could not resist
turning round to look at them again. Their faces, which had already been
raised, were again lowered, but the only fair head among them remained
motionless, as if all the strength and intelligence she had left
had abandoned her. When he entered Madame’s room, Louis found his
sister-in-law reclining upon the cushions of her cabinet. She rose and
made a profound reverence, murmuring some words of thanks for the honor
she was receiving. She then resumed her seat, overcome by a sudden
weakness, which was no doubt assumed, for a delightful color animated
her cheeks, and her eyes, still red from the tears she had recently
shed, never had more fire in them. When the king was seated, as soon as
he had remarked, with that accuracy of observation which characterized
him, the disorder of the apartment, and the no less great disorder of
Madame’s countenance, he assumed a playful manner, saying, “My dear
sister, at what hour to-day would you wish the repetition of the ballet
to take place?”

Madame, shaking her charming head, slowly and languishingly said: “Ah!
sire, will you graciously excuse my appearance at the repetition? I was
about to send to inform you that I could not attend to-day.”

“Indeed,” said the king, in apparent surprise; “are you not well?”

“No, sire.”

“I will summon your medical attendants, then.”

“No, for they can do nothing for my indisposition.”

“You alarm me.”

“Sire, I wish to ask your majesty’s permission to return to England.”

The king started. “Return to England,” he said; “do you really say what
you mean?”

“I say it reluctantly, sire,” replied the grand-daughter of Henry IV.,
firmly, her beautiful black eyes flashing. “I regret to have to confide
such matters to your majesty, but I feel myself too unhappy at your
majesty’s court; and I wish to return to my own family.”

“Madame, madame,” exclaimed the king, as he approached her.

“Listen to me, sire,” continued the young woman, acquiring by degrees
that ascendency over her interrogator which her beauty and her nervous
nature conferred; “young as I am, I have already suffered humiliation,
and have endured disdain here. Oh! do not contradict me, sire,” she
said, with a smile. The king colored.

“Then,” she continued, “I had reasoned myself into the belief that
Heaven called me into existence with that object--I, the daughter of a
powerful monarch; that since my father had been deprived of life, Heaven
could well smite my pride. I have suffered greatly; I have been the
cause, too, of my mother suffering much; but I vowed that if Providence
ever placed me in a position of independence, even were it that of a
workman of the lower classes, who gains her bread by her labor, I would
never suffer humiliation again. That day has now arrived; I have been
restored to the fortune due to my rank and to my birth; I have even
ascended again the steps of a throne, and I thought that, in allying
myself with a French prince, I should find in him a relation, a friend,
an equal; but I perceive I have found only a master, and I rebel. My
mother shall know nothing of it; you whom I respect, and whom I--love--”

The king started; never had any voice so gratified his ear.

“You, sire, who know all, since you have come here; you will, perhaps,
understand me. If you had not come, I should have gone to you. I wish
for permission to go away. I leave it to your delicacy of feeling to
exculpate and to protect me.”

“My dear sister,” murmured the king, overpowered by this bold attack,
“have you reflected upon the enormous difficulty of the project you have
conceived?”

“Sire, I do not reflect, I feel. Attacked, I instinctively repel the
attack, nothing more.”

“Come, tell me, what have they done to you?” said the king.

The princess, it will have been seen, by this peculiarly feminine
maneuver, had escaped every reproach, and advanced on her side a far
more serious one; from the accused she became the accuser. It is an
infallible sign of guilt; but notwithstanding that, all women, even the
least clever of the sex, invariably know how to derive some such means
of turning the tables. The king had forgotten that he was paying her a
visit in order to say to her, “What have you done to my brother?” and he
was reduced to weakly asking her, “What have they done to you?”

“What have they done to me?” replied Madame. “One must be a woman to
understand it, sire--they have made me shed tears;” and, with one of
her fingers, whose slenderness and perfect whiteness were unequaled,
she pointed to her brilliant eyes swimming with unshed drops, and again
began to weep.

“I implore you, my dear sister!” said the king, advancing to take her
warm and throbbing hand, which she abandoned to him.

“In the first place, sire, I was deprived of the presence of my
brother’s friend. The Duke of Buckingham was an agreeable, cheerful
visitor; my own countryman, who knew my habits; I will say almost a
companion, so accustomed had we been to pass our days together, with our
other friends, upon the beautiful piece of water at St. James’s.”

“But Villiers was in love with you.”

“A pretext! What does it matter,” she said, seriously, “whether the duke
was in love with me or not? Is a man in love so very dangerous for
me? Ah! sire, it is not sufficient for a man to love a woman.” And she
smiled so tenderly, and with so much archness, that the king felt his
heart swell and throb in his breast.

“At all events, if my brother were jealous?” interrupted the king.

“Very well, I admit that is a reason; and the duke was sent away
accordingly.”

“No, not sent away.”

“Driven away, dismissed, expelled, then, if you prefer it, sire. One of
the first gentlemen of Europe obliged to leave the court of the King
of France, of Louis XIV., like a beggar, on account of a glance or a
bouquet. It was little worthy of a most gallant court; but forgive me,
sire; I forgot, that, in speaking thus, I am attacking your sovereign
power.”

“I assure you, my dear sister, it was not I who dismissed the Duke of
Buckingham; I was charmed with him.”

“It was not you?” said Madame; “ah! so much the better;” and she
emphasized the “so much the better,” as if she had instead said, “so
much the worse.”

A few minutes’ silence ensued. She then resumed: “The Duke of Buckingham
having left--I now know why and by whose means--I thought I should have
recovered my tranquillity; but not at all, for all at once Monsieur
found another pretext; all at once--”

“All at once,” said the king, playfully, “some one else presents
himself. It is but natural; you are beautiful, and will always meet with
men who will madly love you.”

“In that case,” exclaimed the princess, “I will create a solitude around
me, which indeed seems to be what is wished, and what is being prepared
for me. But no, I prefer to return to London. There I am known and
appreciated. I shall have friends, without fearing they may be regarded
as my lovers. Shame! it is a disgraceful suspicion, and unworthy a
gentleman. Monsieur has lost everything in my estimation, since he has
shown me he can be a tyrant to a woman.”

“Nay, nay, my brother’s only fault is that of loving you.”

“Love me! Monsieur love me! Ah! sire,” and she burst out laughing.
“Monsieur will never love any woman,” she said; “Monsieur loves himself
too much; no, unhappily for me, Monsieur’s jealousy is of the worst
kind--he is jealous without love.”

“Confess, however,” said the king, who began to be excited by this
varied and animated conversation; “confess that Guiche loves you.”

“Ah! sire, I know nothing about that.”

“You must have perceived it. A man who loves readily betrays himself.”

“M. de Guiche has not betrayed himself.”

“My dear sister, you are defending M. de Guiche.”

“I, indeed! Ah, sire, I only needed a suspicion from yourself to crown
my wretchedness.”

“No, madame, no,” returned the king, hurriedly; “do not distress
yourself. Nay, you are weeping. I implore you to calm yourself.”

She wept, however, and large tears fell upon her hands; the king took
one of her hands in his, and kissed the tears away. She looked at him
so sadly and with so much tenderness that he felt his heart giving way
under her gaze.

“You have no kind of feeling, then, for Guiche?” he said, more disturbed
than became his character of mediator.

“None--absolutely none.”

“Then I can reassure my brother in that respect?”

“Nothing will satisfy him, sire. Do not believe he is jealous. Monsieur
has been badly advised by some one, and he is of nervous disposition.”

“He may well be so when you are concerned,” said the king.

Madame cast down her eyes, and was silent; the king did so likewise,
still holding her hand all the while. Their momentary silence seemed to
last an age. Madame gently withdrew her hand, and from that moment, she
felt her triumph was certain, and that the field of battle was her own.

“Monsieur complains,” said the king, “that you prefer the society of
private individuals to his own conversation and society.”

“But Monsieur passes his life in looking at his face in the glass,
and in plotting all sorts of spiteful things against women with the
Chevalier de Lorraine.”

“Oh, you are going somewhat too far.”

“I only tell you what is true. Do you observe for yourself, sire, and
you will see that I am right.”

“I will observe; but, in the meantime, what satisfaction can I give my
brother?”

“My departure.”

“You repeat that word,” exclaimed the king, imprudently, as if, during
the last ten minutes, such a change had been produced that Madame would
have had all her ideas on the subject thoroughly changed.

“Sire, I cannot be happy here any longer,” she said. “M. de Guiche
annoys Monsieur. Will he be sent away, too?”

“If it be necessary, why not?” replied the king, smiling.

“Well; and after M. de Guiche--whom, by the by, I shall regret--I warn
you, sire.”

“Ah, you will regret him?”

“Certainly; he is amiable, he has a great friendship for me, and he
amuses me.”

“If Monsieur were only to hear you,” said the king, slightly annoyed,
“do you know I would not undertake to make it up again between you; nay,
I would not even attempt it.”

“Sire, can you, even now, prevent Monsieur from being jealous of the
first person who may approach? I know very well that M. de Guiche is not
the first.”

“Again I warn you that as a good brother I shall take a dislike to De
Guiche.”

“Ah, sire, do not, I entreat you, adopt either the sympathies or the
dislikes of Monsieur. Remain king; better for yourself and for every one
else.”

“You jest charmingly, madame; and I can well understand how the people
you attack must adore you.”

“And is that the reason why you, sire, whom I had regarded as my
defender, are about to join these who persecute me?” said Madame.

“I your persecutor! Heaven forbid!”

“Then,” she continued, languishingly, “grant me a favor.”

“Whatever you wish.”

“Let me return to England.”

“Never, never!” exclaimed Louis XIV.

“I am a prisoner, then?”

“In France--if France is a prison--yes.”

“What must I do, then?”

“I will tell you. Instead of devoting yourself to friendships which are
somewhat unstable, instead of alarming us by your retirement, remain
always in our society, do not leave us, let us live as a united family.
M. de Guiche is certainly very amiable; but if, at least, we do not
possess his wit--”

“Ah, sire, you know very well you are pretending to be modest.”

“No, I swear to you. One may be a king, and yet feel that he possesses
fewer chances of pleasing than many other gentlemen.”

“I am sure, sire, that you do not believe a single word you are saying.”

The king looked at Madame tenderly, and said, “Will you promise me one
thing?”

“What is it?”

“That you will no longer waste upon strangers, in your own apartments,
the time which you owe us. Shall we make an offensive and defensive
alliance against the common enemy?”

“An alliance with you, sire?”

“Why not? Are you not a sovereign power?”

“But are you, sire, a reliable ally?”

“You shall see, madame.”

“And when shall this alliance commence?”

“This very day.”

“I will draw up the treaty, and you shall sign it.”

“Blindly.”

“Then, sire, I promise you wonders; you are the star of the court, and
when you make your appearance, everything will be resplendent.”

“Oh, madame, madame,” said Louis XIV., “you know well that there is no
brilliancy that does not proceed from yourself, and that if I assume the
sun as my device, it is only an emblem.”

“Sire, you flatter your ally, and you wish to deceive her,” said Madame,
threatening the king with her finger menacingly raised.

“What! you believe I am deceiving you, when I assure you of my
affection?”

“Yes.”

“What makes you so suspicious?”

“One thing.”

“What is it? I shall indeed be unhappy if I do not overcome it.”

“That one thing in question, sire, is not in your power, not even in the
power of Heaven.”

“Tell me what it is.”

“The past.”

“I do not understand, madame,” said the king, precisely because he had
understood her but too well.

The princess took his hand in hers. “Sire,” she said, “I have had the
misfortune to displease you for so long a period, that I have almost
the right to ask myself to-day why you were able to accept me as a
sister-in-law.”

“Displease me! You have displeased me?”

“Nay, do not deny it, for I remember it well.”

“Our alliance shall date from to-day,” exclaimed the king, with a warmth
that was not assumed. “You will not think any more of the past, will
you? I myself am resolved that I will not. I shall always remember the
present; I have it before my eyes; look.” And he led the princess before
a mirror, in which she saw herself reflected, blushing and beautiful
enough to overcome a saint.

“It is all the same,” she murmured; “it will not be a very worthy
alliance.”

“Must I swear?” inquired the king, intoxicated by the voluptuous turn
the whole conversation had taken.

“Oh, I will not refuse to witness a resounding oath,” said Madame; “it
has always the _semblance_ of security.”

The king knelt upon a footstool and took Madame’s hand. She, with a
smile that no painter could ever succeed in depicting, and which a poet
might only imagine, gave him both her hands, in which he hid his burning
face. Neither of them could utter a syllable. The king felt Madame
withdraw her hands, caressing his face while she did so. He rose
immediately and left the apartment. The courtiers remarked his
heightened color, and concluded that the scene had been a stormy one.
The Chevalier de Lorraine, however, hastened to say, “Nay, be comforted,
gentlemen, his majesty is always pale when he is angry.”



Chapter XXXIV. The Advisers.

The king left Madame in a state of agitation it would have been
difficult even for himself to have explained. It is impossible, in fact,
to depict the secret play of those strange sympathies which, suddenly
and apparently without any cause, are excited, after many years passed
in the greatest calmness and indifference, by two hearts destined to
love each other. Why had Louis formerly disdained, almost hated, Madame?
Why did he now find the same woman so beautiful, so captivating? And
why, not only were his thoughts occupied about her, but still more, why
were they so continuously occupied about her? Why, in fact, had Madame,
whose eyes and mind were sought for in another direction, shown during
the last week towards the king a semblance of favor which encouraged
the belief of still greater regard. It must not be supposed that Louis
proposed to himself any plan of seduction; the tie which united Madame
to his brother was, or at least, seemed to him, an insuperable barrier;
he was even too far removed from that barrier to perceive its existence.
But on the downward path of those passions in which the heart rejoices,
towards which youth impels us, no one can decide where to stop, not even
the man who has in advance calculated all the chances of his own success
or another’s submission. As far as Madame was concerned, her regard
for the king may easily be explained: she was young, a coquette, and
ardently fond of admiration. Hers was one of those buoyant, impetuous
natures, which upon a theatre would leap over the greatest obstacles to
obtain an acknowledgement of applause from the spectators. It was not
surprising, then, that, after having been adored by Buckingham, by De
Guiche, who was superior to Buckingham, even if it were only from
that negative merit, so much appreciated by women, that is to say,
novelty--it was not surprising, we say, that the princess should raise
her ambition to being admired by the king, who not only was the first
person in the kingdom, but was one of the handsomest and cleverest men
in Europe. As for the sudden passion with which Louis was inspired for
his sister-in-law, physiology would perhaps supply an explanation
by some hackneyed commonplace reasons, and nature by means of her
mysterious affinity of characters. Madame had the most beautiful black
eyes in the world; Louis, eyes as beautiful, but blue. Madame was
laughter-loving and unreserved in her manners; Louis, melancholy and
diffident. Summoned to meet each other for the first time upon the
grounds of interest and common curiosity, these two opposite
natures were mutually influenced by the mingling of their reciprocal
contradictions of character. Louis, when he returned to his own rooms,
acknowledged to himself that Madame was the most attractive woman of his
court. Madame, left alone, delightedly thought that she had made a
great impression on the king. This feeling with her must remain passive,
whilst the king could not but act with all the natural vehemence of the
heated fancies of a young man, and of a young man who has but to express
a wish to see his wish fulfilled.

The first thing the king did was to announce to Monsieur that everything
was quietly arranged; that Madame had the greatest respect, the
sincerest affection for him; but that she was of a proud, impetuous
character, and that her susceptibilities were so acute as to require
very careful management.

Monsieur replied in the reticent tone of voice he generally adopted with
his brother, that he could not very well understand the susceptibilities
of a woman whose conduct might, in his opinion, expose her to censorious
remarks, and that if any one had a right to feel wounded, it was he,
Monsieur himself. To this the king replied in a quick tone of voice,
which showed the interest he took in his sister-in-law, “Thank Heaven,
Madame is above censure.”

“The censure of others, certainly, I admit,” said Monsieur; “but not
above mine, I presume.”

“Well,” said the king, “all I have to say, Philip, is that Madame’s
conduct does not deserve your censure. She certainly is heedless and
singular, but professes the best feelings. The English character is not
always well understood in France, and the liberty of English manners
sometimes surprises those who do not know the extent to which this
liberty is enriched by innocence.”

“Ah!” said Monsieur, more and more piqued, “from the very moment that
your majesty absolves my wife, whom I accuse, my wife is not guilty, and
I have nothing more to say.”

“Philip,” replied the king hastily, for he felt the voice of conscience
murmuring softly in his heart, that Monsieur was not altogether
wrong, “what I have done, and what I have said, has been only for your
happiness. I was told that you complained of a want of confidence and
attention on Madame’s part, and I did not wish your uneasiness to be
prolonged. It is part of my duty to watch over your household, as over
that of the humblest of my subjects. I have satisfied myself,
therefore, with the sincerest pleasure, that your apprehensions have no
foundation.”

“And,” continued Monsieur, in an interrogative tone of voice, and fixing
his eyes upon his brother, “what your majesty has discovered for Madame
--and I bow myself to your superior judgment--have you verified for
those who have been the cause of the scandal of which I complain?”

“You are right, Philip,” said the king; “I will reserve that point for
future consideration.”

These words comprised an order as well as a consolation; the prince felt
it to be so, and withdrew.

As for Louis, he went to seek his mother, for he felt that he had need
of a more complete absolution than that he had just received from his
brother. Anne of Austria did not entertain for M. de Guiche the same
reasons for indulgence she had had for Buckingham. She perceived, at
the very first words he pronounced, that Louis was not disposed to be
severe.

To appear in a contradictory humor was one of the stratagems of the good
queen, in order to succeed in ascertaining the truth. But Louis was no
longer in his apprenticeship; already for more than a year past he
had been king, and during that year he had learned how to dissemble.
Listening to Anne of Austria, in order to permit her to disclose her own
thoughts, testifying his approval only by look and gesture, he became
convinced, from certain piercing glances, and from certain skillful
insinuations, that the queen, so clear-sighted in matters of gallantry,
had, if not guessed, at least suspected, his weakness for Madame. Of all
his auxiliaries, Anne of Austria would be the most important to secure;
of all his enemies, Anne of Austria would prove most dangerous. Louis,
therefore, changed his maneuvers. He complained of Madame, absolved
Monsieur, listened to what his mother had to say of De Guiche, as he had
previously listened to what she had to say of Buckingham, and then, when
he saw that she thought she had gained a complete victory over him, he
left her.

The whole of the court, that is to say, all the favorites and more
intimate associates, and they were numerous, since there were already
five masters, were assembled in the evening for the repetition of the
ballet. This interval had been occupied by poor De Guiche in receiving
visits; among the number was one which he hoped and feared nearly to
an equal extent. It was that of the Chevalier de Lorraine. About three
o’clock in the afternoon the chevalier entered De Guiche’s rooms. His
looks were of the most reassuring character. “Monsieur,” said he to
De Guiche, “was in an excellent humor, and no none could say that the
slightest cloud had passed across the conjugal sky. Besides, Monsieur
was not one to bear ill-feeling.”

For a long time past, during his residence at the court, the Chevalier
de Lorraine had decided, that of Louis XIII.’s two sons, Monsieur
was the one who had inherited the father’s character--an uncertain,
irresolute character; impulsively good, indifferently disposed at
bottom; but certainly a cipher for his friends. He especially cheered De
Guiche, by pointing out to him that Madame would, before long, succeed
in governing her husband, and that, consequently, that man would govern
Monsieur who should succeed in influencing Madame.

To this, De Guiche full of mistrust and presence of mind, replied, “Yes,
chevalier; but I believe Madame to be a very dangerous person.”

“In what respect?”

“She has perceived that Monsieur is not very passionately inclined
towards women.”

“Quite true,” said the Chevalier de Lorraine, laughing.

“In that case, Madame will choose the first one who approaches, in order
to make him the object of her preference, and to bring back her husband
by jealousy.”

“Deep! deep!” exclaimed the chevalier.

“But true,” replied De Guiche.

Neither the one nor the other expressed his real thought. De Guiche, at
the very moment he thus attacked Madame’s character, mentally asked her
forgiveness from the bottom of his heart. The chevalier, while admiring
De Guiche’s penetration, was leading him, blindfolded, to the brink
of the precipice. De Guiche then questioned him more directly upon the
effect produced by the scene of the morning, and upon the still more
serious effect produced by the scene at dinner.

“But I have already told you they are all laughing at it,” replied the
Chevalier de Lorraine, “and Monsieur himself at the head of them.”

“Yet,” hazarded De Guiche, “I have heard that the king paid Madame a
visit.”

“Yes, precisely so. Madame was the only one who did not laugh, and the
king went to her in order to make her laugh, too.”

“So that--”

“So that nothing is altered in the arrangements of the day,” said the
chevalier.

“And is there a repetition of the ballet this evening?”

“Certainly.”

“Are you sure?”

“Quite,” returned the chevalier.

At this moment of the conversation between the two young men, Raoul
entered, looking full of anxiety. As soon as the chevalier, who had a
secret dislike for him, as for every other noble character, perceived
him enter, he rose from his seat.

“What do you advise me to do, then?” inquired De Guiche of the
chevalier.

“I advise you to go to sleep in perfect tranquillity, my dear count.”

“And my advice, De Guiche,” said Raoul, “is the very opposite.”

“What is that?”

“To mount your horse and set off at once for one of your estates; on
your arrival, follow the chevalier’s advice, if you like; and, what is
more, you can sleep there as long and as tranquilly as you please.”

“What! set off!” exclaimed the chevalier, feigning surprise; “why should
De Guiche set off?”

“Because, and you cannot be ignorant of it--you particularly so--
because every one is talking about the scene which has passed between
Monsieur and De Guiche.”

De Guiche turned pale.

“Not at all,” replied the chevalier, “not at all; and you have been
wrongly informed, M. de Bragelonne.”

“I have been perfectly well informed, on the contrary, monsieur,”
 replied Raoul, “and the advice I give De Guiche is that of a friend.”

During this discussion, De Guiche, somewhat shaken, looked alternately
first at one and then at the other of his advisers. He inwardly felt
that a game, important in all its consequences for the rest of his life,
was being played at that moment.

“Is it not fact,” said the chevalier, putting the question to the
count himself, “is it not fact, De Guiche, that the scene was not
so tempestuous as the Vicomte de Bragelonne seems to think, and who,
moreover, was not himself there?”

“Whether tempestuous or not,” persisted Raoul, “it is not precisely of
the scene itself that I am speaking, but of the consequences that may
ensue. I know that Monsieur has threatened, I know that Madame has been
in tears.”

“Madame in tears!” exclaimed De Guiche, imprudently clasping his hands.

“Ah!” said the chevalier, laughing, “this is indeed a circumstance I
was not acquainted with. You are decidedly better informed than I am,
Monsieur de Bragelonne.”

“And it is because I am better informed than yourself, chevalier, that I
insist upon De Guiche leaving.”

“No, no; I regret to differ from you, vicomte; but his departure is
unnecessary. Why, indeed, should he leave? tell us why.”

“The king!”

“The king!” exclaimed De Guiche.

“Yes; I tell you the king has taken up the affair.”

“Bah!” said the chevalier, “the king likes De Guiche, and particularly
his father; reflect, that, if the count were to leave, it would be an
admission that he had done something which merited rebuke.”

“Why so?”

“No doubt of it; when one runs away, it is either from guilt or fear.”

“Sometimes, because a man is offended; often because he is wrongfully
accused,” said Bragelonne. “We will assign as a reason for his
departure, that he feels hurt and injured--nothing will be easier; we
will say that we both did our utmost to keep him, and you, at least,
will not be speaking otherwise than the truth. Come, De Guiche, you are
innocent, and, being so, the scene of to-day must have wounded you. So
set off.”

“No, De Guiche, remain where you are,” said the chevalier; “precisely
as M. de Bragelonne has put it, because you are innocent. Once more,
forgive me, vicomte; but my opinion is the very opposite to your own.”

“And you are at perfect liberty to maintain it, monsieur; but be assured
that the exile which De Guiche will voluntarily impose upon himself
will be of short duration. He can terminate it whenever he pleases, and
returning from his voluntary exile, he will meet with smiles from all
lips; while, on the contrary, the anger of the king may now draw down a
storm upon his head, the end of which no one can foresee.”

The chevalier smiled, and muttered to himself, “That is the very thing I
wish.” And at the same time he shrugged his shoulders, a movement which
did not escape the count, who dreaded, if he quitted the court, to seem
to yield to a feeling of fear.

“No, no; I have decided, Bragelonne; I stay.”

“I prophesy, then,” said Raoul, sadly, “that misfortune will befall you,
De Guiche.”

“I, too, am a prophet, but not a prophet of evil; on the contrary,
count, I say to you, ‘remain.’”

“Are you sure,” inquired De Guiche, “that the repetition of the ballet
still takes place?”

“Quite sure.”

“Well, you see, Raoul,” continued De Guiche, endeavoring to smile, “you
see, the court is not so very sorrowful, or so readily disposed for
internal dissensions, when dancing is carried on with such assiduity.
Come, acknowledge that,” said the count to Raoul, who shook his head,
saying, “I have nothing to add.”

“But,” inquired the chevalier, curious to learn whence Raoul had
obtained his information, the exactitude of which he was inwardly forced
to admit, “since you say you are well informed, vicomte, how can you be
better informed than myself, who am one of the prince’s most intimate
companions?”

“To such a declaration I submit. You certainly ought to be perfectly
well informed, I admit; and, as a man of honor is incapable of saying
anything but what he knows to be true, or of speaking otherwise than
what he thinks, I will say no more, but confess myself defeated, and
leave you in possession of the field of battle.”

Whereupon Raoul, who now seemed only to care to be left quiet, threw
himself upon a couch, whilst the count summoned his servants to aid him
in dressing. The chevalier, finding that time was passing away, wished
to leave; but he feared, too, that Raoul, left alone with De Guiche,
might yet influence him to change his mind. He therefore made use of his
last resource.

“Madame,” he said, “will be brilliant; she appears to-day in her costume
of Pomona.”

“Yes, that is so,” exclaimed the count.

“And she has just given directions in consequence,” continued the
chevalier. “You know, Monsieur de Bragelonne, that the king is to appear
as Spring.”

“It will be admirable,” said De Guiche; “and that is a better reason
for me to remain than any you have yet given, because I am to appear
as Autumn, and shall have to dance with Madame. I cannot absent myself
without the king’s orders, since my departure would interrupt the
ballet.”

“I,” said the chevalier, “am to be only a simple _egypan_; true, it is,
I am a bad dancer, and my legs are not well made. Gentlemen, adieu.
Do not forget the basket of fruit, which you are to offer to Pomona,
count.”

“Rest assured,” said De Guiche, delightedly, “I shall forget nothing.”

“I am now quite certain that he will remain,” murmured the Chevalier de
Lorraine to himself.

Raoul, when the chevalier had left, did not even attempt to dissuade
his friend, for he felt that it would be trouble thrown away; he merely
observed to the comte, in his melancholy and melodious voice, “You are
embarking in a most dangerous enterprise. I know you well; you go to
extremes in everything, and the lady you love does so, too. Admitting
for an instant that she should at last love you--”

“Oh, never!” exclaimed De Guiche.

“Why do you say never?”

“Because it would be a great misfortune for both of us.”

“In that case, instead of regarding you simply imprudent, I cannot but
consider you absolutely mad.”

“Why?”

“Are you perfectly sure--mind, answer me frankly--that you do not wish
her whom you love to make any sacrifice for you?”

“Yes, yes; quite sure.”

“Love her, then, at a distance.”

“What! at a distance?”

“Certainly; what matters being present or absent, since you expect
nothing from her? Love her portrait, a memento.”

“Raoul!”

“Love is a shadow, an illusion, a chimera; be devoted to the affection
itself, in giving a name to your ideality.”

“Ah!”

“You turn away; your servants approach. I will say no more. In good or
bad fortune, De Guiche, depend on me.”

“Indeed I shall do so.”

“Very well; that is all I had to say to you. Spare no pains in your
person, De Guiche, and look your very best. Adieu.”

“You will not be present, then, at the ballet, vicomte?”

“No; I shall have a visit to pay in town. Farewell, De Guiche.”

The reception was to take place in the king’s apartments. In the first
place, there were the queens, then Madame, and a few ladies of the
court, who had been carefully selected. A great number of courtiers,
also selected, occupied the time, before the dancing commenced, in
conversing, as people knew how to converse in those times. None of the
ladies who had received invitations appeared in the costumes of
the _fete_, as the Chevalier de Lorraine had predicted, but many
conversations took place about the rich and ingenious toilettes designed
by different painters for the ballet of “The Demi-Gods,” for thus were
termed the kings and queens of which Fontainebleau was about to
become the Pantheon. Monsieur arrived, holding in his hand a drawing
representing his character; he looked somewhat anxious; he bowed
courteously to the young queen and his mother, but saluted Madame almost
cavalierly. His notice of her and his coldness of manner were observed
by all. M. de Guiche indemnified the princess by a look of passionate
devotion, and it must be admitted that Madame, as she raised her eyes,
returned it to him with interest. It is unquestionable that De Guiche
had never looked so handsome, for Madame’s glance had its customary
effect of lighting up the features of the son of the Marshal de Gramont.
The king’s sister-in-law felt a storm mustering above her head; she
felt, too, that during the whole of the day, so fruitful in future
events, she had acted unjustly, if not treasonably, towards one who
loved her with such a depth of devotion. In her eyes the moment seemed
to have arrived for an acknowledgement to the poor victim of the
injustice of the morning. Her heart spoke, and murmured the name of
De Guiche; the count was sincerely pitied and accordingly gained the
victory over all others. Neither Monsieur, nor the king, nor the Duke of
Buckingham, was any longer thought of; De Guiche at that moment reigned
without a rival. But although Monsieur also looked very handsome, still
he could not be compared to the count. It is well known--indeed all
women say so--that a wide difference invariably exists between the good
looks of a lover and those of a husband. Besides, in the present case,
after Monsieur had left, and after the courteous and affectionate
recognition of the young queen and of the queen-mother, and the careless
and indifferent notice of Madame, which all the courtiers had remarked;
all these motives gave the lover the advantage over the husband.
Monsieur was too great a personage to notice these details. Nothing
is so certain as a well settled idea of superiority to prove the
inferiority of the man who has that opinion of himself. The king
arrived. Every one looked for what might possibly happen in the glance,
which began to bestir the world, like the brow of Jupiter Tonans. Louis
had none of his brother’s gloominess, but was perfectly radiant. Having
examined the greater part of the drawings which were displayed for his
inspection on every side, he gave his opinion or made his remarks upon
them, and in this manner rendered some happy and others wretched by a
single word. Suddenly his glance, which was smilingly directed towards
Madame, detected the slight correspondence established between the
princess and the count. He bit his lips, but when he opened them again
to utter a few commonplace remarks, he said, advancing towards the
queens:--

“I have just been informed that everything is now prepared at
Fontainebleau, in accordance with my directions.” A murmur of
satisfaction arose from the different groups, and the king perceived
on every face the greatest anxiety to receive an invitation for the
_fetes_. “I shall leave to-morrow,” he added. Whereupon the profoundest
silence immediately ensued. “And I invite,” said the king, finishing,
“all those who are now present to get ready to accompany me.”

Smiling faces were now everywhere visible, with the exception of
Monsieur, who seemed to retain his ill-humor. The different noblemen
and ladies of the court thereupon defiled before the king, one after the
other, in order to thank his majesty for the great honor which had been
conferred upon them by the invitation. When it came to De Guiche’s turn,
the king said, “Ah! M. de Guiche, I did not see you.”

The comte bowed, and Madame turned pale. De Guiche was about to open
his lips to express his thanks, when the king said, “Comte, this is the
season for farming purposes in the country; I am sure your tenants in
Normandy will be glad to see you.”

The king, after this pitiless attack, turned his back on the poor comte,
whose turn it was now to become pale; he advanced a few steps towards
the king, forgetting that the king is never spoken to except in reply to
questions addressed.

“I have perhaps misunderstood your majesty,” he stammered out.

The king turned his head slightly, and with a cold and stern glance,
which plunged like a sword relentlessly into the hearts of those under
disgrace, repeated, “I said retire to your estates,” allowing every
syllable to fall slowly one by one.

A cold perspiration bedewed the comte’s face, his hands convulsively
opened, and his hat, which he held between his trembling fingers, fell
to the ground. Louis sought his mother’s glance, as though to show her
that he was master; he sought his brother’s triumphant look, as if to
ask him if he were satisfied with the vengeance taken; and lastly, his
eyes fell upon Madame; but the princess was laughing and smiling with
Madame de Noailles. She heard nothing, or rather had pretended not to
hear at all. The Chevalier de Lorraine looked on also, with one of those
looks of fixed hostility that seemed to give to a man’s glance the power
of a lever when it raises an obstacle, wrests it away, and casts it to
a distance. M. de Guiche was left alone in the king’s cabinet, the whole
of the company having departed. Shadows seemed to dance before his eyes.
He suddenly broke through the settled despair that overwhelmed him, and
flew to hide himself in his own room, where Raoul awaited him, immovable
in his own sad presentiments.

“Well?” he murmured, seeing his friend enter, bareheaded, with a wild
gaze and tottering gait.

“Yes, yes, it is true,” said De Guiche, unable to utter more, and
falling exhausted upon the couch.

“And she?” inquired Raoul.

“She,” exclaimed his unhappy friend, as he raised his hand clenched in
anger, towards Heaven. “She!--”

“What did she say and do?”

“She said that her dress suited her admirably, and then she laughed.”

A fit of hysteric laughter seemed to shatter his nerves, for he fell
backwards, completely overcome.



Chapter XXXV. Fontainebleau.

For four days, every kind of enchantment brought together in the
magnificent gardens of Fontainebleau had converted this spot into a
place of the most perfect enjoyment. M. Colbert seemed gifted with
ubiquity. In the morning there were the accounts of the previous night’s
expenses to settle; during the day, programmes, essays, enrolments,
payments. M. Colbert had amassed four millions of francs, and dispersed
them with sleepless economy. He was horrified at the expenses which
mythology involved; not a wood nymph, nor a dryad, that cost less than a
hundred francs a day! The dress alone amounted to three hundred francs.
The expense of powder and sulphur for fireworks amounted, every night,
to a hundred thousand francs. In addition to these, the illuminations
on the borders of the sheet of water cost thirty thousand francs
every evening. The _fetes_ had been magnificent; and Colbert could not
restrain his delight. From time to time, he noticed Madame and the king
setting forth on hunting expeditions, or preparing for the reception
of different fantastic personages, solemn ceremonials, which had been
extemporized a fortnight before, and in which Madame’s sparkling wit and
the king’s magnificence were equally well displayed.

For Madame, the heroine of the _fete_, replied to the addresses of the
deputations from unknown races--Garamanths, Scythians, Hyperboreans,
Caucasians, and Patagonians, who seemed to issue from the ground for the
purpose of approaching her with their congratulations; and upon every
representative of these races the king bestowed a diamond, or some other
article of value. Then the deputies, in verses more or less amusing,
compared the king to the sun, Madame to Phoebe, the sun’s sister, and
the queen and Monsieur were no more spoken of than if the king had
married Henrietta of England, and not Maria Theresa of Austria. The
happy pair, hand in hand, imperceptibly pressing each other’s fingers,
drank in deep draughts the sweet beverage of adulation, by which the
attractions of youth, beauty, power and love are enhanced. Every one at
Fontainebleau was amazed at the extent of the influence which Madame had
so rapidly acquired over the king, and whispered among themselves that
Madame was, in point of fact, the true queen; and in effect, the king
himself proclaimed its truth by his every thought, word, and look. He
formed his wishes, he drew his inspirations from Madame’s eyes, and his
delight was unbounded when Madame deigned to smile upon him. And was
Madame, on her side, intoxicated with the power she wielded, as she
beheld every one at her feet? This was a question she herself could
hardly answer; but what she did know was, that she could frame no wish,
and that she felt herself to be perfectly happy. The result of all these
changes, the source of which emanated from the royal will, was that
Monsieur, instead of being the second person in the kingdom, had, in
reality, become the third. And it was now far worse than in the time
when De Guiche’s guitars were heard in Madame’s apartments; for, then,
at least, Monsieur had the satisfaction of frightening those who annoyed
him. Since the departure, however, of the enemy, who had been driven
away by means of his alliance with the king, Monsieur had to submit to a
burden, heavier, but in a very different sense, to his former one. Every
evening Madame returned home quite exhausted. Horse-riding, bathing
in the Seine, spectacles, dinners under the leafy covert of the trees,
balls on the banks of the grand canal, concerts, etc., etc.; all this
would have been sufficient to have killed, not a slight and delicate
woman, but the strongest porter in the _chateau_. It is perfectly
true that, with regard to dancing, concerts, and promenades, and such
matters, a woman is far stronger than the most robust of porters. But,
however great a woman’s strength may be, there is a limit to it, and she
cannot hold out long under such a system. As for Monsieur, he had not
even the satisfaction of witnessing Madame’s abdication of her royalty
in the evening, for she lived in the royal pavilion with the young queen
and the queen-mother. As a matter of course, the Chevalier de Lorraine
did not quit Monsieur, and did not fail to distil drops of gall into
every wound the latter received. The result was, that Monsieur--who
had at first been in the highest spirits, and completely restored since
Guiche’s departure--subsided into his melancholy state three days after
the court was installed at Fontainebleau.

It happened, however, that, one day, about two o’clock in the afternoon,
Monsieur, who had risen late, and had bestowed upon his toilet more than
his usual attention,--it happened, we repeat, that Monsieur, who had not
heard of any plans having been arranged for the day, formed the project
of collecting his own court, and of carrying Madame off with him to
Moret, where he possessed a charming country house. He accordingly went
to the queen’s pavilion, and was astonished, on entering, to find none
of the royal servants in attendance. Quite alone, therefore, he entered
the rooms, a door on the left opening to Madame’s apartment, the one on
the right to the young queen’s. In his wife’s apartment, Monsieur was
informed, by a sempstress who was working there, that every one had left
at eleven o’clock, for the purpose of bathing in the Seine, that a grand
_fete_ was to be made of the expedition, that all the carriages had been
placed at the park gates, and that they had all set out more than an
hour ago.

“Very good,” said Monsieur, “the idea is a good one; the heat is very
oppressive, and I have no objection to bathe, too.”

He summoned his servants, but no one came. He summoned those in
attendance on Madame, but everybody had gone out. He went to the
stables, where he was informed by a groom that there were no carriages
of any description. He desired that a couple of horses should be
saddled, one for himself and the other for his valet. The groom told him
that all the horses had been sent away. Monsieur, pale with anger, again
descended towards the queen’s apartments, and penetrated as far as
Anne of Austria’s oratory, where he perceived, through the half-opened
tapestry-hangings, his young and beautiful sister on her knees before
the queen-mother, who appeared weeping bitterly. He had not been either
seen or heard. He cautiously approached the opening, and listened, the
sight of so much grief having aroused his curiosity. Not only was the
young queen weeping, but she was complaining also. “Yes,” she said, “the
king neglects me, the king devotes himself to pleasures and amusements
only, in which I have no share.”

“Patience, patience, my daughter,” said Anne of Austria, in Spanish; and
then, also in Spanish, added some words of advice, which Monsieur did
not understand. The queen replied by accusations, mingled with sighs and
sobs, among which Monsieur often distinguished the word _banos_, which
Maria Theresa accentuated with spiteful anger.

“The baths,” said Monsieur to himself; “it seems it is the baths that
have put her out.” And he endeavored to put together the disconnected
phrases which he had been able to understand. It was easy to guess that
the queen was complaining bitterly, and that, if Anne of Austria did not
console her, she at least endeavored to do so. Monsieur was afraid to
be detected listening at the door and he therefore made up his mind to
cough; the two queens turned round at the sound and Monsieur entered. At
sight of the prince, the young queen rose precipitately, and dried her
tears. Monsieur, however, knew the people he had to deal with too
well, and was naturally too polite to remain silent, and he accordingly
saluted them. The queen-mother smiled pleasantly at him, saying, “What
do you want, Philip?”

“I?--nothing,” stammered Monsieur. “I was looking for--”

“Whom?”

“I was looking for Madame.”

“Madame is at the baths.”

“And the king?” said Monsieur, in a tone which made the queen tremble.

“The king also, the whole court as well,” replied Anne of Austria.

“Except you, madame,” said Monsieur.

“Oh! I,” said the young queen, “I seem to terrify all those who amuse
themselves.”

“And so do I,--judging from appearances,” rejoined Monsieur.

Anne of Austria made a sigh to her daughter-in-law, who withdrew,
weeping.

Monsieur’s brows contracted, as he remarked aloud, “What a cheerless
house. What do you think of it, mother?”

“Why, no; everybody here is pleasure-hunting.”

“Yes, indeed, that is the very thing that makes those dull who do not
care for pleasure.”

“In what a tone you say that, Philip.”

“Upon my word, madame, I speak as I think.”

“Explain yourself; what is the matter?”

“Ask my sister-in-law, rather, who, just now, was detailing all her
grievances to you.”

“Her grievances, what--”

“Yes, I was listening; accidentally, I confess, but still I listened--so
that I heard only too well my sister complain of those famous baths of
Madame--”

“Ah! folly!”

“No, no, no; people are not always foolish when they weep. The queen
said _banos_, which means baths.”

“I repeat, Philip,” said Anne of Austria, “that your sister is
childishly jealous.”

“In that case, madame,” replied the prince, “I, too, must with great
humility accuse myself of possessing the same defect.”

“You also, Philip?”

“Certainly.”

“Are you really jealous of these baths?”

“And why not, madame, when the king goes to the baths with my wife, and
does not take the queen? Why not, when Madame goes to the baths with the
king, and does not do me the honor to even invite me? And you enjoin my
sister-in-law to be satisfied, and require me to be satisfied, too.”

“You are raving, my dear Philip,” said Anne of Austria; “you have driven
the Duke of Buckingham away; you have been the cause of M. de Guiche’s
exile; do you now wish to send the king away from Fontainebleau?”

“I do not pretend to anything of the kind, madame,” said Monsieur,
bitterly; “but, at least, I can withdraw, and I shall do so.”

“Jealous of the king--jealous of your brother?”

“Yes, madame, I am jealous of the king--of my own brother, and
remarkably jealous, too.”

“Really, Monsieur,” exclaimed Anne of Austria, affecting to be
indignant, “I begin to believe you are mad, and a sworn enemy to my
repose. I therefore abandon the place to you, for I have no means of
defending myself against such monomanias.”

She arose and left Monsieur a prey to the most extravagant transport
of passion. He remained for a moment completely bewildered; then,
recovering himself, again went to the stables, found the groom, once
more asked him for a carriage or a horse, and upon his reply that there
was neither the one or the other, Monsieur snatched a long whip from the
hand of a stable-boy, and began to pursue the poor devil of a groom all
round the servants’ courtyard, whipping him the while, in spite of his
cries and excuses; then, quite out of breath, covered with perspiration,
and trembling in every limb, he returned to his own apartments, broke
in pieces some beautiful specimens of porcelain, and then got into bed,
booted and spurred as he was, crying out for some one to come to him.
[4]



Chapter XXXVI. The Bath.

At Vulaines, beneath the impenetrable shade of flowering osiers
and willows, which, as they bent down their green heads, dipped
the extremities of their branches in the blue waters, a long and
flat-bottomed boat, with ladders covered with long blue curtains, served
as a refuge for the bathing Dianas, who, as they left the water, were
watched by twenty plumed Acteons, who, eagerly, and full of admiration,
galloped up and down the flowery banks of the river. But Diana
herself, even the chaste Diana, clothed in her long chlamys, was less
beautiful--less impenetrable, than Madame, as young and beautiful
as that goddess herself. For, notwithstanding the fine tunic of the
huntress, her round and delicate knee can be seen; and notwithstanding
the sonorous quiver, her brown shoulders can be detected; whereas, in
Madame’s case, a long white veil enveloped her, wrapping her round and
round a hundred times, as she resigned herself into the hands of her
female attendants, and thus was rendered inaccessible to the most
indiscreet, as well as to the most penetrating gaze. When she ascended
the ladder, the poets were present--and all were poets when Madame was
the subject of discussion--the twenty poets who were galloping about,
stopped, and with one voice, exclaimed that pearls, and not drops of
water, were falling from her person, to be lost again in the happy
river. The king, the center of these effusions, and of this respectful
homage, imposed silence upon those expatiators, for whom it seemed
impossible to exhaust their raptures, and he rode away, for fear of
offending, even through the silken curtains, the modesty of the woman
and the dignity of the princess. A great blank thereupon ensued in
the scene, and perfect silence in the boat. From the movements on
board--from the flutterings and agitations of the curtains--the goings
to and fro of the female attendants engaged in their duties, could be
guessed.

The king smilingly listened to the conversation of the courtiers around
him, but it could easily be perceived that he gave but little, if any,
attention to their remarks. In fact, hardly had the sound of the rings
drawn along the curtain-rods announced that Madame was dressed, and that
the goddess was about to make her reappearance, than the king,
returning to his former post immediately, and running quite close to
the river-bank, gave the signal for all those to approach whose duty
or pleasure summoned them to Madame’s side. The pages hurried forward,
conducting the led horses; the carriages, which had remained sheltered
under the trees, advanced towards the tent, followed by a crowd of
servants, bearers, and female attendants, who, while their masters had
been bathing, had mutually exchanged their own observations, critical
remarks, and the discussion of matters personal--the fugitive journal
of that period, of which no one now remembers anything, not even by the
waves, the witnesses of what went on that day--themselves now sublimed
into immensity, as the actors have vanished into eternity.

A crowd of people swarming upon the banks of the river, without
reckoning the groups of peasants drawn together by their anxiety to see
the king and the princess, was, for many minutes, the most disorderly,
but the most agreeable, mob imaginable. The king dismounted from his
horse, a movement which was imitated by all the courtiers, and offered
his hat to Madame, whose rich riding-habit displayed her fine figure,
which was set off to great advantage by that garment, made of fine
woolen cloth embroidered with silver. Her hair, still damp and blacker
than jet, hung in heavy masses upon her white and delicate neck. Joy and
health sparkled in her beautiful eyes; composed, yet full of energy, she
inhaled the air in deep draughts, under a lace parasol, which was borne
by one of her pages. Nothing could be more charming, more graceful, more
poetical, than these two figures buried under the rose-colored shade
of the parasol, the king, whose white teeth were displayed in continual
smiles, and Madame, whose black eyes sparkled like carbuncles in the
glittering reflection of the changing hues of the silk. When Madame
approached her horse, a magnificent animal of Andalusian breed, of
spotless white, somewhat heavy, perhaps, but with a spirited and
splendid head, in which the mixture, happily combined, of Arabian and
Spanish blood could be readily traced, and whose long tail swept the
ground; and as the princess affected difficulty in mounting, the king
took her in his arms in such a manner that Madame’s arm was clasped like
a circlet of alabaster around the king’s neck. Louis, as he withdrew,
involuntarily touched with his lips the arm, which was not withheld, and
the princess having thanked her royal equerry, every one sprang to his
saddle at the same moment. The king and Madame drew aside to allow the
carriages, the outriders, and runners, to pass by. A fair proportion of
the cavaliers, released from the restraint etiquette had imposed upon
them, gave the rein to their horses, and darted after the carriages
which bore the maids of honor, as blooming as so many virgin huntresses
around Diana, and the human whirlwind, laughing, chattering, and noisy,
passed onward.

The king and Madame, however, kept their horses in hand at a foot-pace.
Behind his majesty and his sister-in-law, certain of the courtiers
--those, at least, who were seriously disposed or were anxious to be
within reach, or under the eyes, of the king--followed at a respectful
distance, restraining their impatient horses, regulating their pace by
that of the king and Madame, and abandoned themselves to all the delight
and gratification which is to be found in the conversation of clever
people, who can, with perfect courtesy, make a thousand atrocious, but
laughable remarks about their neighbors. In their stifled laughter, and
in the little reticences of their sardonic humor, Monsieur, the poor
absentee, was not spared. But they pitied, and bewailed greatly, the
fate of De Guiche, and it must be confessed that their compassion, as
far as he was concerned, was not misplaced. The king and Madame having
breathed the horses, and repeated a hundred times over such remarks as
the courtiers, who supplied them with talk, suggested to them, set off
at a hand gallop, and the leafy coverts of the forest resounded to the
footfalls of the mounted party. To the conversations beneath the
shade of the trees,--to remarks made in the shape of confidential
communications, and observations, mysteriously exchanged, succeeded the
noisiest bursts of laughter;--from the very outriders to royalty itself,
merriment seemed to spread. Every one began to laugh and to cry out.
The magpies and the jays fluttered away uttering their guttural cries,
beneath the waving avenues of oaks; the cuckoo staid his monotonous cry
in the recesses of the forest; the chaffinch and tomtit flew away in
clouds; while the terrified deer bounded riverwards from the midst of
the thickets. This crowd, spreading joy, confusion, and light wherever
it passed, was heralded, it may be said, to the chateau by its own
clamor. As the king and Madame entered the village, they were received
by the acclamations of the crowd. Madame hastened to look for Monsieur,
for she instinctively understood that he had been far too long kept from
sharing in this joy. The king went to rejoin the queens; he knew he owed
them--one especially--a compensation for his long absence. But Madame
was not admitted to Monsieur’s apartments, and she was informed that
Monsieur was asleep. The king, instead of being met by Maria Theresa
smiling, as was usual with her, found Anne of Austria in the gallery
watching for his return, who advanced to meet him, and taking him by the
hand, led him to her own apartment. No one ever knew what was the nature
of the conversation which took place between them, or rather what it was
that the queen-mother said to Louis XIV.; but the general tenor of the
interview might certainly be guessed from the annoyed expression of the
king’s face as he left her.

But we, whose mission it is to interpret all things, as it is also to
communicate our interpretations to our readers,--we should fail in
our duty, if we were to leave them in ignorance of the result of this
interview. It will be found sufficiently detailed, at least we hope so,
in the following chapter.



Chapter XXXVII. The Butterfly-Chase.

The king, on retiring to his apartments to give some directions and
to arrange his ideas, found on his toilette-glass a small note, the
handwriting of which seemed disguised. He opened it and read--“Come
quickly, I have a thousand things to say to you.” The king and Madame
had not been separated a sufficiently long time for these thousand
things to be the result of the three thousand which they had been
saying to each other during the route which separated Vulaines from
Fontainebleau. The confused and hurried character of the note gave the
king a great deal to reflect upon. He occupied himself but slightly with
his toilette, and set off to pay his visit to Madame. The princess, who
did not wish to have the appearance of expecting him, had gone into the
gardens with the ladies of her suite. When the king was informed that
Madame had left her apartments and had gone for a walk in the gardens,
he collected all the gentlemen he could find, and invited them to follow
him. He found Madame engaged in chasing butterflies, on a large lawn
bordered with heliotrope and flowering broom. She was looking on as the
most adventurous and youngest of her ladies ran to and fro, and with her
back turned to a high hedge, very impatiently awaited the arrival of the
king, with whom she had appointed the rendezvous. The sound of many feet
upon the gravel walk made her turn round. Louis XIV. was hatless, he
had struck down with his cane a peacock butterfly, which Monsieur de
Saint-Aignan had picked up from the ground quite stunned.

“You see, Madame,” said the king, as he approached her, “that I, too,
am hunting on your behalf!” and then, turning towards those who had
accompanied him, said, “Gentlemen, see if each of you cannot obtain as
much for these ladies,” a remark which was a signal for all to retire.
And thereupon a curious spectacle might have been observed; old and
corpulent courtiers were seen running after butterflies, losing their
hats as they ran, and with their raised canes cutting down the myrtles
and the furze, as they would have done the Spaniards.

The king offered Madame his arm, and they both selected, as the center
of observation, a bench with a roof of boards and moss, a kind of hut
roughly designed by the modest genius of one of the gardeners who had
inaugurated the picturesque and fanciful amid the formal style of
the gardening of that period. This sheltered retreat, covered with
nasturtiums and climbing roses, screened the bench, so that the
spectators, insulated in the middle of the lawn, saw and were seen on
every side, but could not be heard, without perceiving those who might
approach for the purpose of listening. Seated thus, the king made a sign
of encouragement to those who were running about; and then, as if he
were engaged with Madame in a dissertation upon the butterfly, which he
had thrust through with a gold pin and fastened on his hat, said to her,
“How admirably we are placed here for conversations.”

“Yes, sire, for I wished to be heard by you alone, and yet to be seen by
every one.”

“And I also,” said Louis.

“My note surprised you?”

“Terrified me rather. But what I have to tell you is more important.”

“It cannot be, sire. Do you know that Monsieur refuses to see me?”

“Why so?”

“Can you not guess why?”

“Ah, Madame! in that case we have both the same thing to say to each
other.”

“What has happened to you, then?”

“You wish me to begin?”

“Yes, for I have told you all.”

“Well, then, as soon as I returned, I found my mother waiting for me,
and she led me away to her own apartments.”

“The queen-mother?” said Madame, with some anxiety, “the matter is
serious then.”

“Indeed it is, for she told me... but, in the first place, allow me to
preface what I have to say with one remark. Has Monsieur ever spoken to
you about me?”

“Often.”

“Has he ever spoken to you about his jealousy?”

“More frequently still.”

“Of his jealousy of me?”

“No, but of the Duke of Buckingham and De Guiche.”

“Well, Madame, Monsieur’s present idea is a jealousy of myself.”

“Really,” replied the princess, smiling archly.

“And it really seems to me,” continued the king, “that we have never
given any ground--”

“Never! at least _I_ have not. But who told you that Monsieur was
jealous?”

“My mother represented to me that Monsieur entered her apartments like a
madman, that he uttered a thousand complaints against you, and--forgive
me for saying it--against your coquetry. It appears that Monsieur
indulges in injustice, too.”

“You are very kind, sire.”

“My mother reassured him; but he pretended that people reassure him too
often, and that he had had quite enough of it.”

“Would it not be better for him not to make himself uneasy in any way?”

“The very thing I said.”

“Confess, sire, that the world is very wicked. Is it possible that a
brother and sister cannot converse together, or take pleasure in each
other’s company, without giving rise to remarks and suspicions? For
indeed, sire, we are doing no harm, and have no intention of doing any.”
 And she looked at the king with that proud yet provoking glance that
kindles desire in the coldest and wisest of men.

“No!” sighed the king, “that is true.”

“You know very well, sire, that if it were to continue, I should be
obliged to make a disturbance. Do you decide upon our conduct, and say
whether it has, or has not, been perfectly correct.”

“Oh, certainly--perfectly correct.”

“Often alone together,--for we delight in the same things,--we might
possibly be led away into error, but _have_ we been? I regard you as a
brother, and nothing more.”

The king frowned. She continued:

“Your hand, which often meets my own, does not excite in me that
agitation and emotion which is the case with those who love each other,
for instance--”

“Enough,” said the king, “enough, I entreat you. You have no pity--you
are killing me.”

“What is the matter?”

“In fact, then, you distinctly say you experience nothing when near me.”

“Oh, sire! I don’t say that--my affection--”

“Enough, Henrietta, I again entreat you. If you believe me to be marble,
as you are, undeceive yourself.”

“I do not understand you, sire.”

“Very well,” said the king, casting down his eyes. “And so our meetings,
the pressure of each other’s hand, the looks we have exchanged--Yes,
yes; you are right, and I understand your meaning,” and he buried his
face in his hands.

“Take care, sire,” said Madame, hurriedly, “Monsieur de Saint-Aignan is
looking at you.”

“Of course,” said Louis, angrily; “never even the shadow of liberty!
never any sincerity in my intercourse with any one! I imagine I have
found a friend, who is nothing but a spy; a dearer friend, who is only
a--sister!”

Madame was silent, and cast down her eyes.

“My husband is jealous,” she murmured, in a tone of which nothing could
equal its sweetness and charm.

“You are right,” exclaimed the king, suddenly.

“You see,” she said, looking at him in a manner that set his heart on
fire, “you are free, you are not suspected, the peace of your house is
not disturbed.”

“Alas,” said the king, “as yet you know nothing, for the queen is
jealous.”

“Maria Theresa!”

“Stark mad with jealousy! Monsieur’s jealousy arises from hers; she was
weeping and complaining to my mother, and was reproaching us for those
bathing parties, which have made me so happy.”

“And me too,” answered Madame, by a look.

“When, suddenly,” continued the king, “Monsieur, who was listening,
heard the word ‘_banos_,’ which the queen pronounced with some degree
of bitterness, that awakened his attention; he entered the room, looking
quite wild, broke into the conversation, and began to quarrel with my
mother so bitterly that she was obliged to leave him; so that, while you
have a jealous husband to deal with, I shall have perpetually present
before me a specter of jealousy with swollen eyes, a cadaverous face,
and sinister looks.”

“Poor king,” murmured Madame, as she lightly touched the king’s hand.
He retained her hand in his, and in order to press it without exciting
suspicion in the spectators, who were not so much taken up with the
butterflies that they could not occupy themselves about other matters,
and who perceived clearly enough that there was some mystery in the
king’s and Madame’s conversation, Louis placed the dying butterfly
before his sister-in-law, and bent over it as if to count the thousand
eyes of its wings, or the particles of golden dust which covered it.
Neither of them spoke; however, their hair mingled, their breaths
united, and their hands feverishly throbbed in each other’s grasp. Five
minutes passed in this manner.



Chapter XXXVIII. What Was Caught after the Butterflies.

The two young people remained for a moment with their heads bent down,
bowed, as it were, beneath the double thought of the love which was
springing up in their hearts, and which gives birth to so many happy
fancies in the imaginations of twenty years of age. Henrietta gave
a side glance, from time to time, at the king. Hers was one of those
finely-organized natures capable of looking inwardly at itself, as well
as at others at the same moment. She perceived Love lying at the bottom
of Louis’s heart, as a skillful diver sees a pearl at the bottom of
the sea. She knew Louis was hesitating, if not in doubt, and that his
indolent or timid heart required aid and encouragement. “And so?” she
said, interrogatively, breaking the silence.

“What do you mean?” inquired Louis, after a moment’s pause.

“I mean, that I shall be obliged to return to the resolution I had
formed.”

“To what resolution?”

“To that which I have already submitted to your majesty.”

“When?”

“On the very day we had a certain explanation about Monsieur’s
jealousies.”

“What did you say to me then?” inquired Louis, with some anxiety.

“Do you not remember, sire?”

“Alas! if it be another cause of unhappiness, I shall recollect it soon
enough.”

“A cause of unhappiness for myself alone, sire,” replied Madame
Henrietta; “but as it is necessary, I must submit to it.”

“At least, tell me what it is,” said the king.

“Absence.”

“Still that unkind resolve?”

“Believe me, sire, I have not found it without a violent struggle with
myself; it is absolutely necessary I should return to England.”

“Never, never will I permit you to leave France,” exclaimed the king.

“And yet, sire,” said Madame, affecting a gentle yet sorrowful
determination, “nothing is more urgently necessary; nay, more than that,
I am persuaded it is your mother’s desire I should do so.”

“Desire!” exclaimed the king; “that is a very strange expression to use
to me.”

“Still,” replied Madame Henrietta, smilingly, “are you not happy in
submitting to the wishes of so good a mother?”

“Enough, I implore you; you rend my very soul.”

“I?”

“Yes; for you speak of your departure with tranquillity.”

“I was not born for happiness, sire,” replied the princess, dejectedly;
“and I acquired, in very early life, the habit of seeing my dearest
wishes disappointed.”

“Do you speak truly?” said the king. “Would your departure gainsay any
one of your cherished thoughts?”

“If I were to say ‘yes,’ would you begin to take your misfortune
patiently?”

“How cruel you are!”

“Take care, sire; some one is coming.”

The king looked all round him, and said, “No, there is no one,” and
then continued: “Come, Henrietta, instead of trying to contend against
Monsieur’s jealousy by a departure which would kill me--”

Henrietta slightly shrugged her shoulders like a woman unconvinced.
“Yes,” repeated Louis, “which would kill me, I say. Instead of fixing
your mind on this departure, does not your imagination--or rather does
not your heart--suggest some expedient?”

“What is it you wish my heart to suggest?”

“Tell me, how can one prove to another that it is wrong to be jealous?”

“In the first place, sire, by giving no motive for jealousy; in other
words, in loving no one but the person in question.”

“Oh! I expected more than that.”

“What did you expect?”

“That you would simply tell me that jealous people are pacified
by concealing the affection which is entertained for the object of
jealousy.”

“Dissimulation is difficult, sire.”

“Yet it is only be means of conquering difficulties that any happiness
is attained. As far as I am concerned, I swear I will give the lie to
those who are jealous of me by pretending to treat you like any other
woman.”

“A bad, as well as unsafe, means,” said the young princess, shaking her
pretty head.

“You seem to think everything bad, dear Henrietta,” said Louis,
discontentedly. “You negative everything I propose. Suggest, at least,
something else in its stead. Come, try and think. I trust implicitly to
a woman’s invention. Do you invent in your turn?”

“Well, sire, I have hit upon something. Will you listen to it?”

“Can you ask me? You speak of a matter of life or death to me, and then
ask if I will listen.”

“Well, I judge of it by my own case. If my husband intended to put me on
the wrong scent with regard to another woman, one thing would reassure
me more than anything else.”

“What would that be?”

“In the first place to see that he never took any notice of the woman in
question.”

“Exactly. That is precisely what I said just now.”

“Very well; but in order to be perfectly reassured on the subject, I
should like to see him occupy himself with some one else.”

“Ah! I understand you,” replied Louis, smiling. “But confess, dear
Henrietta, if the means is at least ingenious, it is hardly charitable.”

“Why so?”

“In curing the dread of a wound in a jealous person’s mind, you inflict
one upon the heart. His fear ceases, it is true; but the evil still
exists; and that seems to me to be far worse.”

“Agreed; but he does not detect, he does not suspect the real enemy; he
does no prejudice to love itself; he concentrates all his strength on
the side where his strength will do no injury to anything or any one.
In a word, sire, my plan, which I confess I am surprised to find you
dispute, is mischievous to jealous people, it is true; but to lovers it
is full of advantage. Besides, let me ask, sire, who, except yourself,
has ever thought of pitying jealous people? Are they not a melancholy
crew of grumblers always equally unhappy, whether with or without
a cause? You may remove that cause, but you never can remove their
sufferings. It is a disease which lies in the imagination, and, like all
imaginary disorders, it is incurable. By the by, I remember an aphorism
upon this subject, of poor Dr. Dawley, a clever and amusing man, who,
had it not been for my brother, who could not do without him, I should
have with me now. He used to say, ‘Whenever you are likely to suffer
from two affections, choose that which will give you the least trouble,
and I will allow you to retain it; for it is positive,’ he said, ‘that
that very ailment is of the greatest service to me, in order to enable
me to get rid of the other.’”

“Well and judiciously remarked, Henrietta,” replied the king, smiling.

“Oh! we have some clever people in London, sire.”

“And those clever people produce adorable pupils. I will grant this
Daley, Darley, Dawley, or whatever you call him, a pension for his
aphorism; but I entreat you, Henrietta, to begin by choosing the least
of your evils. You do not answer--you smile. I guess that the least of
your bugbears is your stay in France. I will allow you to retain this
information; and, in order to begin with the cure of the other, I will
this very day begin to look out for a subject which shall divert the
attention of the jealous members of either sex who persecute us both.”

“Hush! this time some one is really coming,” said Madame; and she
stooped to gather a flower from the thick grass at her feet. Some one,
in fact, was approaching; for, suddenly, a bevy of young girls ran down
from the top of the hillock, following the cavaliers--the cause of this
interruption being a magnificent hawk-moth, with wings like rose-leaves.
The prey in question had fallen into the net of Mademoiselle de
Tonnay-Charente, who displayed it with some pride to her less successful
rivals. The queen of the chase had seated herself some twenty paces from
the bank on which Louis and Madame Henrietta were reclining; and leaned
her back against a magnificent oak-tree entwined with ivy, and stuck
the butterfly on the long cane she carried in her hand. Mademoiselle
de Tonnay-Charente was very beautiful, and the gentlemen, accordingly,
deserted her companions, and under the pretext of complimenting her
upon her success, pressed in a circle around her. The king and princess
looked gloomily at this scene, as spectators of maturer age look on
at the games of little children. “They seem to be amusing themselves
there,” said the king.

“Greatly, sire; I have always found that people are amused wherever
youth and beauty are to be found.”

“What do you think of Mademoiselle de Tonnay-Charente, Henrietta?”
 inquired the king.

“I think she has rather too much flax-yellow and lily-whiteness in her
complexion,” replied Madame, fixing in a moment upon the only fault it
was possible to find in the almost perfect beauty of the future Madame
de Montespan.”

“Rather too fair, yes; but beautiful, I think, in spite of that.”

“Is that your opinion, sire?”

“Yes, really.”

“Very well; and it is mine, too.”

“And she seems to be much sought after.”

“On, that is a matter of course. Lovers flutter from one to another. If
we had hunted for lovers instead of butterflies, you can see, from those
who surround her, what successful sport we should have had.”

“Tell me, Henrietta, what would be said if the king were to make himself
one of those lovers, and let his glance fall in that direction? Would
some one else be jealous, in such a case?”

“Oh! sire, Mademoiselle de Tonnay-Charente is a very efficacious
remedy,” said Madame, with a sigh. “She would cure a jealous man,
certainly; but she might possibly make a woman jealous, too.”

“Henrietta,” exclaimed Louis, “you fill my heart with joy. Yes, yes;
Mademoiselle de Tonnay-Charente is far too beautiful to serve as a
cloak.”

“A king’s cloak,” said Madame Henrietta, smiling, “ought to be
beautiful.”

“Do you advise me to do it, then?” inquired Louis.

“I! what should I say, sire, except that to give such an advice would be
to supply arms against myself? It would be folly or pride to advise you
to take, for the heroine of an assumed affection, a woman more beautiful
than the one for whom you pretend to feel real regard.”

The king tried to take Madame’s hand in his own; his eyes sought hers;
and then he murmured a few words so full of tenderness, but pronounced
in so low a tone, that the historian, who ought to hear everything,
could not hear them. Then, speaking aloud, he said, “Do you yourself
choose for me the one who is to cure our jealous friend. To her, then,
all my devotion, all my attention, all the time that I can spare from
my occupations, shall be devoted. For her shall be the flower that I
may pluck for you, the fond thoughts with which you have inspired me.
Towards her I will direct the glance I dare not bestow upon you, and
which ought to be able to rouse you from your indifference. But, be
careful in your selection, lest, in offering her the rose which I may
have plucked, I find myself conquered by you; and my looks, my hand, my
lips, turn immediately towards you, even were the whole world to guess
my secret.”

While these words escaped from the king’s lips, in a stream of wild
affection, Madame blushed, breathless, happy, proud, almost intoxicated
with delight. She could find nothing to say in reply; her pride and her
thirst for homage were satisfied. “I shall fail,” she said, raising her
beautiful black eyes, “but not as you beg me, for all this incense which
you wish to burn on the altar of another divinity. Ah! sire, I too shall
be jealous of it, and want restored to me; and would not that a particle
of it should be lost in the way. Therefore, sire, with your royal
permission, I will choose one who shall appear to me the least likely
to distract your attention, and who will leave my image intact and
unshadowed in your heart.”

“Happily for me,” said the king, “your heart is not hard and unfeeling.
If it were so, I should be alarmed at the threat you hold out.
Precautions were taken on this point, and around you, as around myself,
it would be difficult to meet with a disagreeable-looking face.”

Whilst the king was speaking, Madame had risen from her seat, looked
around the greensward, and after a careful and silent examination,
she called the king to her side, and said, “See yonder, sire, upon the
declivity of that little hill, near that group of Guelder roses, that
beautiful girl walking alone, her head down, her arms hanging by her
side, with her eyes fixed upon the flowers, which she crushes beneath
her feet, like one who is lost in thought.”

“Mademoiselle de Valliere, do you mean?” remarked the king.

“Yes.”

“Oh!”

“Will she not suit you, sire?”

“Why, look how thin the poor child is. She has hardly any flesh upon her
bones.”

“Nay: am I stout then?”

“She is so melancholy.”

“The greater contrast to myself, who am accused of being too lively.”

“She is lame.”

“Do you really think so?”

“No doubt of it. Look; she has allowed every one to pass by her, through
fear of her defect being remarked.”

“Well, she will not run so fast as Daphne, and will not be as able to
escape Apollo.”

“Henrietta,” said the king, out of temper; “of all your maids of honor,
you have really selected for me the one most full of defects.”

“Still she is one of my maids of honor.”

“Of course; but what do you mean?”

“I mean that, in order to visit this new divinity, you will not be able
to do so without paying a visit to my apartments, and that, as propriety
will forbid your conversing with her in private, you will be compelled
to see her in my circle, to speak, as it were, at me, while speaking to
her. I mean, in fact, that those who may be jealous, will be wrong if
they suppose you come to my apartments for my sake, since you will go
there for Mademoiselle de la Valliere.”

“Who happens to be lame.”

“Hardly that.”

“Who never opens her lips.”

“But who, when she does open them, displays a beautiful set of teeth.”

“Who may serve as a model for an osteologist.”

“Your favor will change her appearance.”

“Henrietta!”

“At all events you allowed me to choose.”

“Alas! yes.”

“Well, my choice is made: I impose her upon you, and you must submit.”

“Oh! I would accept one of the furies, if you were to insist upon it.”

“La Valliere is as gentle as a lamb: do not fear she will ever
contradict you when you tell her you love her,” said Madame, laughing.

“You are not afraid, are you, that I shall say too much to her?”

“It would be for my sake.”

“The treaty is agreed to, then?”

“Not only so, but signed. You will continue to show me the friendship of
a brother, the attention of a brother, the gallantry of a monarch, will
you not?”

“I will preserve for you intact a heart that has already become
accustomed to beat only at your command.”

“Very well, do you not see that we have guaranteed the future by this
means?”

“I hope so.”

“Will your mother cease to regard me as an enemy?”

“Yes.”

“Will Maria Theresa leave off speaking in Spanish before Monsieur,
who has a horror of conversation held in foreign languages, because
he always thinks he is being ill spoken of? and lastly,” continued the
princess, “will people persist in attributing a wrongful affection to
the king when the truth is, we can offer nothing to each other, except
absolute sympathy, free from mental reservation?”

“Yes, yes,” said the king, hesitatingly. “But other things may still be
said of us.”

“What can be said, sire? shall we never be left in tranquillity?”

“People will say I am deficient in taste; but what is my self-respect in
comparison with your tranquillity?”

“In comparison with my honor, sire, and that of our family, you mean.
Besides, I beg you to attend, do not be so hastily prejudiced against La
Valliere. She is slightly lame, it is true, but she is not deficient in
good sense. Moreover, all that the king touches is converted into gold.”

“Well, Madame, rest assured of one thing, namely, that I am still
grateful to you: you might even yet make me pay dearer for your stay in
France.”

“Sire, some one approaches.”

“Well!”

“One last word.”

“Say it.”

“You are prudent and judicious, sire; but in the present instance you
will be obliged to summon to your aid all your prudence, and all your
judgment.”

“Oh!” exclaimed Louis, laughing, “from this very day I shall begin to
act my part, and you shall see whether I am not quite fit to represent
the character of a tender swain. After luncheon, there will be a
promenade in the forest, and then there is supper and the ballet at ten
o’clock.”

“I know it.”

“The ardor of my passion shall blaze more brilliantly than the
fireworks, shall shine more steadily than our friend Colbert’s lamps;
it shall shine so dazzlingly that the queens and Monsieur will be almost
blinded by it.”

“Take care, sire, take care.”

“In Heaven’s name, what have I done, then?”

“I shall begin to recall the compliments I paid you just now. You
prudent! you wise! did I say? Why, you begin by the most reckless
inconsistencies! Can a passion be kindled in this manner, like a torch,
in a moment? Can a monarch, such as you are, without any preparation,
fall at the feet of a girl like La Valliere?”

“Ah! Henrietta, now I understand you. We have not yet begun the
campaign, and you are plundering me already.”

“No, I am only recalling you to common-sense ideas. Let your passion be
kindled gradually, instead of allowing it to burst forth so suddenly.
Jove’s thunders and lightnings are heard and seen before the palace
is set on fire. Everything has its commencements. If you are so easily
excited, no one will believe you are really captivated, and every one
will think you out of your senses--if even, indeed, the truth itself not
be guessed. The public is not so fatuous as they seem.”

The king was obliged to admit that Madame was an angel for sense, and
the very reverse for cleverness. He bowed, and said: “Agreed, Madame,
I will think over my plan of attack: great military men--my cousin
De Conde for instance--grow pale in meditation upon their strategical
plans, before they move one of the pawns, which people call armies; I
therefore wish to draw up a complete plan of campaign; for you know that
the tender passion is subdivided in a variety of ways. Well, then,
I shall stop at the village of Little Attentions, at the hamlet of
Love-Letters, before I follow the road of Visible Affection; the way is
clear enough, you know, and poor Madame de Scudery would never forgive
me for passing though a halting-place without stopping.”

“Oh! now we have returned to our proper senses, shall we say adieu,
sire?”

“Alas! it must be so, for see, we are interrupted.”

“Yes, indeed,” said Henrietta, “they are bringing Mademoiselle de
Tonnay-Charente and her sphinx butterfly in grand procession this way.”

“It is perfectly well understood, that this evening, during the
promenade, I am to make my escape into the forest, and find La Valliere
without you.”

“I will take care to send her away.”

“Very well! I will speak to her when she is with her companions, and I
will then discharge my first arrow at her.”

“Be skillful,” said Madame, laughing, “and do not miss the heart.”

Then the princess took leave of the king, and went forward to meet the
merry troop, which was advancing with much ceremony, and a great many
pretended flourishes of trumpets, imitated with their mouths.



Chapter XXXIX. The Ballet of the Seasons.

At the conclusion of the banquet, which was served at five o’clock, the
king entered his cabinet, where his tailors were awaiting him for the
purpose of trying on the celebrated costume representing Spring, which
was the result of so much imagination, and had cost so many efforts of
thought to the designers and ornament-workers of the court. As for the
ballet itself, every person knew the part he had to take in it, and
how to perform it. The king had resolved to make it surprise. Hardly,
therefore, had he finished his conference, and entered his own
apartment, than he desired his two masters of the ceremonies, Villeroy
and Saint-Aignan, to be sent for. Both replied that they only awaited
his orders, and that everything was ready to begin, but that it was
necessary to be sure of fine weather and a favorable night before these
orders could be carried out. The king opened his window; the pale-gold
hues of the evening were visible on the horizon through the vistas of
the wood, and the moon, white as snow, was already mounting the heavens.
Not a ripple could be noticed on the surface of the green waters; the
swans themselves, even, reposing with folded wings like ships at anchor,
seemed inspirations of the warmth of the air, the freshness of the
water, and the silence of the beautiful evening. The king, having
observed all these things, and contemplated the magnificent picture
before him, gave the order which De Villeroy and De Saint-Aignan
awaited; but with a view of insuring the execution of this order in a
royal manner, one last question was necessary, and Louis XIV. put it to
the two gentlemen in the following manner:--“Have you any money?”

“Sire,” replied Saint-Aignan, “we have arranged everything with M.
Colbert.”

“Ah! very well!”

“Yes, sire, and M. Colbert said he would wait upon your majesty, as
soon as your majesty should manifest an intention of carrying out the
_fetes_, of which he has furnished the programme.”

“Let him come in, then,” said the king; and as if Colbert had been
listening at the door for the purpose of keeping himself _au courant_
with the conversation, he entered as soon as the king had pronounced his
name to the two courtiers.

“Ah! M. Colbert,” said the king. “Gentlemen, to your posts,” whereupon
Saint-Aignan and Villeroy took their leave. The king seated himself in
an easy-chair near the window, saying: “The ballet will take place this
evening, M. Colbert.”

“In that case, sire, I will pay all accounts to-morrow.”

“Why so?”

“I promised the tradespeople to pay their bills the day following that
on which the ballet should take place.”

“Very well, M. Colbert, pay them, since you have promised to do so.”

“Certainly, sire; but I must have money to do that.”

“What! have not the four millions, which M. Fouquet promised, been sent?
I forgot to ask you about it.”

“Sire, they were sent at the hour promised.”

“Well?”

“Well, sire, the colored lamps, the fireworks, the musicians, and the
cooks, have swallowed up four millions in eight days.”

“Entirely?”

“To the last penny. Every time your majesty directed the banks of the
grand canal to be illuminated, as much oil was consumed as there was
water in the basins.”

“Well, well, M. Colbert; the fact is, then, you have no more money?”

“I have no more, sire, but M. Fouquet has,” Colbert replied, his face
darkening with a sinister expression of pleasure.

“What do you mean?” inquired Louis.

“We have already made M. Fouquet advance six millions. He has given
them with too much grace not to have others still to give, if they are
required, which is the case at the present moment. It is necessary,
therefore, that he should comply.”

The king frowned. “M. Colbert,” said he, accentuating the financier’s
name, “that is not the way I understood the matter; I do not wish to
make use, against any of my servants, of a means of pressure which
may oppress him and fetter his services. In eight days M. Fouquet has
furnished six millions; that is a good round sum.”

Colbert turned pale. “And yet,” he said, “your majesty did not use this
language some time ago, when the news about Belle-Isle arrived, for
instance.”

“You are right, M. Colbert.”

“Nothing, however, has changed since then; on the contrary, indeed.”

“In my thoughts, monsieur, everything has changed.”

“Does your majesty then no longer believe the disloyal attempt?”

“My affairs concern myself alone, monsieur; and I have already told you
I transact them without interference.”

“Then, I perceive,” said Colbert, trembling with anger and fear, “that I
have had the misfortune to fall into disgrace with your majesty.”

“Not at all; you are, on the contrary, most agreeable to me.”

“Yet, sire,” said the minister, with a certain affected bluntness, so
successful when it was a question of flattering Louis’s self-esteem,
“what use is there in being agreeable to your majesty, if one can no
longer be of any use?”

“I reserve your services for a better occasion; and believe me, they
will only be the better appreciated.”

“Your majesty’s plan, then, in this affair, is--”

“You want money, M. Colbert?”

“Seven hundred thousand francs, sire.”

“You will take them from my private treasure.” Colbert bowed. “And,”
 added Louis, “as it seems a difficult matter for you, notwithstanding
your economy, to defray, with so limited a sum, the expenses which I
intend to incur, I will at once sign an order for three millions.”

The king took a pen and signed an order immediately, then handed it
to Colbert. “Be satisfied, M. Colbert, the plan I have adopted is one
worthy of a king,” said Louis XIV., who pronounced these words with all
the majesty he knew how to assume in such circumstances; and dismissed
Colbert for the purpose of giving an audience to his tailors.

The order issued by the king was known throughout the whole of
Fontainebleau; it was already known, too, that the king was trying on
his costume, and that the ballet would be danced in the evening. The
news circulated with the rapidity of lightning; during its progress it
kindled every variety of coquetry, desire, and wild ambition. At the
same moment, as if by enchantment, every one who knew how to hold a
needle, every one who could distinguish a coat from a pair of trousers,
was summoned to the assistance of those who had received invitations.
The king had completed his toilette by nine o’clock; he appeared in an
open carriage decorated with branches of trees and flowers. The queens
had taken their seats upon a magnificent dias or platform, erected
upon the borders of the lake, in a theater of wonderful elegance of
construction. In the space of five hours the carpenters had put together
all the different parts connected with the building; the upholsterers
had laid down the carpets, erected the seats; and, as if at the wave
of an enchanter’s wand, a thousand arms, aiding, instead of interfering
with each other, had constructed the building, amidst the sound of
music; whilst, at the same time, other workmen illuminated the theater
and the shores of the lake with an incalculable number of lamps. As the
heavens, set with stars, were perfectly unclouded, as not even a breath
of air could be heard in the woods, and as if Nature itself had yielded
complacently to the king’s fancies, the back of the theater had been
left open; so that, behind the foreground of the scenes, could be seen
as a background the beautiful sky, glittering with stars; the sheet of
water, illuminated by the lights which were reflected in it; and the
bluish outline of the grand masses of woods, with their rounded tops.
When the king made his appearance, the theater was full, and presented
to the view one vast group, dazzling with gold and precious stones;
in which, however, at the first glance, no single face could be
distinguished. By degrees, as the sight became accustomed to so much
brilliancy, the rarest beauties appeared to the view, as in the evening
sky the stars appear one by one to him who closes his eyes and then
opens them again.

The theater represented a grove of trees; a few fauns lifting up their
cloven feet were jumping about; a dryad made her appearance on the
scene, and was immediately pursued by them; others gathered round her
for her defense, and they quarrelled as they danced. Suddenly, for the
purpose of restoring peace and order, Spring, accompanied by his whole
court, made his appearance. The Elements, subaltern powers of mythology,
together with their attributes, hastened to follow their gracious
sovereign. The Seasons, allies of Spring, followed him closely, to form
a quadrille, which, after many words of more or less flattering import,
was the commencement of the dance. The music, hautboys, flutes, and
viols, was delightfully descriptive of rural delights. The king had
already made his appearance, amid thunders of applause. He was dressed
in a tunic of flowers, which set off his graceful and well-formed figure
to advantage. His legs, the best-shaped at court, were displayed to
great advantage in flesh-colored silken hose, of silk so fine and so
transparent that it seemed almost like flesh itself. The most beautiful
pale-lilac satin shoes, with bows of flowers and leaves, imprisoned his
small feet. The bust of the figure was in harmonious keeping with the
base; Louis’s waving hair floated on his shoulders, the freshness of his
complexion was enhanced by the brilliancy of his beautiful blue eyes,
which softly kindled all hearts; a mouth with tempting lips, which
deigned to open in smiles. Such was the prince of that period: justly
that evening styled “The King of all the Loves.” There was something in
his carriage which resembled the buoyant movements of an immortal, and
he did not dance so much as seem to soar along. His entrance produced,
therefore, the most brilliant effect. Suddenly the Comte de Saint-Aignan
was observed endeavoring to approach either the king or Madame.

The princess--who was robed in a long dress, diaphanous and light as the
finest network tissue from the hands of skillful Mechlin workers, one
knee occasionally revealed beneath the folds of the tunic, and her
little feet encased in silken slippers decked with pearls--advanced
radiant with beauty, accompanied by her _cortege_ of Bacchantes, and
had already reached the spot assigned to her in the dance. The applause
continued so long that the comte had ample leisure to join the king.

“What is the matter, Saint-Aignan?” said Spring.

“Nothing whatever,” replied the courtier, as pale as death; “but your
majesty has not thought of Fruits.”

“Yes; it is suppressed.”

“Far from it, sire; your majesty having given no directions about it,
the musicians have retained it.”

“How excessively annoying,” said the king. “This figure cannot be
performed, since M. de Guiche is absent. It must be suppressed.”

“Ah, sire, a quarter of an hour’s music without any dancing will produce
an effect so chilling as to ruin the success of the ballet.”

“But, come, since--”

“Oh, sire, that is not the greatest misfortune; for, after all, the
orchestra could still just as well cut it out, if it were necessary;
but--”

“But what?”

“Why, M. de Guiche is here.”

“Here?” replied the king, frowning, “here? Are you sure?”

“Yes, sire; and ready dressed for the ballet.”

The king felt himself color deeply, and said, “You are probably
mistaken.”

“So little is that the case, sire, that if your majesty will look to the
right, you will see that the comte is in waiting.”

Louis turned hastily towards the side, and in fact, on his right,
brilliant in his character of Autumn, De Guiche awaited until the king
should look at him, in order that he might address him. To give an idea
of the stupefaction of the king, and that of Monsieur, who was moving
about restlessly in his box,--to describe also the agitated movement
of the heads in the theater, and the strange emotion of Madame, at the
sight of her partner,--is a task we must leave to abler hands. The king
stood almost gaping with astonishment as he looked at the comte, who,
bowing lowly, approached Louis with the profoundest respect.

“Sire,” he said, “your majesty’s most devoted servant approaches to
perform a service on this occasion with similar zeal that he has already
shown on the field of battle. Your majesty, in omitting the dance of the
Fruits, would be losing the most beautiful scene in the ballet. I did
not wish to be the substance of so dark a shadow to your majesty’s
elegance, skill, and graceful invention; and I have left my tenants in
order to place my services at your majesty’s commands.”

Every word fell distinctly, in perfect harmony and eloquence, upon Louis
XIV.’s ears. Their flattery pleased, as much as De Guiche’s courage had
astonished him, and he simply replied: “I did not tell you to return,
comte.”

“Certainly not, sire; but your majesty did not tell me to remain.”

The king perceived that time was passing away, that if this strange
scene were prolonged it would complicate everything, and that a single
cloud upon the picture would eventually spoil the whole. Besides, the
king’s heart was filled with two or three new ideas; he had just derived
fresh inspiration from the eloquent glances of Madame. Her look had said
to him: “Since they are jealous of you, divide their suspicions, for the
man who distrusts two rivals does not object to either in particular.”
 So that Madame, by this clever diversion, decided him. The king smiled
upon De Guiche, who did not comprehend a word of Madame’s dumb language,
but he remarked that she pretended not to look at him, and he attributed
the pardon which had been conferred upon him to the princess’s kindness
of heart. The king seemed only pleased with every one present. Monsieur
was the only one who did not understand anything about the matter. The
ballet began; the effect was more than beautiful. When the music, by
its bursts of melody, carried away these illustrious dancers, when the
simple, untutored pantomime of that period, only the more natural on
account of the very indifferent acting of the august actors, had reached
its culminating point of triumph, the theater shook with tumultuous
applause.

De Guiche shone like a sun, but like a courtly sun, that is resigned to
fill a subordinate part. Disdainful of a success of which Madame showed
no acknowledgement, he thought of nothing but boldly regaining the
marked preference of the princess. She, however, did not bestow a single
glance upon him. By degrees all his happiness, all his brilliancy,
subsided into regret and uneasiness; so that his limbs lost their power,
his arms hung heavily by his sides, and his head drooped as though he
was stupefied. The king, who had from this moment become in reality
the principal dancer in the quadrille, cast a look upon his vanquished
rival. De Guiche soon ceased to sustain even the character of the
courtier; without applause, he danced indifferently, and very soon
could not dance at all, by which accident the triumph of the king and of
Madame was assured.



Chapter XL: The Nymphs of the Park of Fontainebleau.

The king remained for a moment to enjoy a triumph as complete as it
could possibly be. He then turned towards Madame, for the purpose of
admiring her also a little in her turn. Young persons love with more
vivacity, perhaps with greater ardor and deeper passion, than others
more advanced in years; but all the other feelings are at the same time
developed in proportion to their youth and vigor: so that vanity being
with them almost always the equivalent of love, the latter feeling,
according to the laws of equipoise, never attains that degree of
perfection which it acquires in men and women from thirty to five and
thirty years of age. Louis thought of Madame, but only after he had
studiously thought of himself; and Madame carefully thought of herself,
without bestowing a single thought upon the king. The victim, however,
of all these royal affections and affectations, was poor De Guiche.
Every one could observe his agitation and prostration--a prostration
which was, indeed, the more remarkable since people were not accustomed
to see him with his arms hanging listlessly by his side, his head
bewildered, and his eyes with all their bright intelligence bedimmed. It
rarely happened that any uneasiness was excited on his account, whenever
a question of elegance or taste was under discussion; and De Guiche’s
defeat was accordingly attributed by the greater number present to his
courtier-like tact and ability. But there were others--keen-sighted
observers are always to be met with at court--who remarked his paleness
and his altered looks; which he could neither feign nor conceal,
and their conclusion was that De Guiche was not acting the part of a
flatterer. All these sufferings, successes, and remarks were blended,
confounded, and lost in the uproar of applause. When, however, the
queens expressed their satisfaction and the spectators their enthusiasm,
when the king had retired to his dressing-room to change his costume,
and whilst Monsieur, dressed as a woman, as he delighted to be, was
in his turn dancing about, De Guiche, who had now recovered himself,
approached Madame, who, seated at the back of the theater, was waiting
for the second part, and had quitted the others for the purpose of
creating a sort of solitude for herself in the midst of the crowd, to
meditate, as it were, beforehand, upon chorographic effects; and it will
be perfectly understood that, absorbed in deep meditation, she did not
see, or rather pretended not to notice, anything that was passing around
her. De Guiche, observing that she was alone, near a thicket constructed
of painted cloth, approached her. Two of her maids of honor, dressed
as hamadryads, seeing De Guiche advance, drew back out of respect.,
whereupon De Guiche proceeded towards the middle of the circle and
saluted her royal highness; but, whether she did or did not observe
his salutations, the princess did not even turn her head. A cold
shiver passed through poor De Guiche; he was unprepared for such utter
indifference, for he had neither seen nor been told of anything that had
taken place, and consequently could guess nothing. Remarking, therefore,
that his obeisance obtained him no acknowledgement, he advanced one step
further, and in a voice which he tried, though vainly, to render calm,
said: “I have the honor to present my most humble respects to your royal
highness.”

Upon this Madame deigned to turn her eyes languishingly towards the
comte, observing. “Ah! M. de Guiche, is that you? good day!”

The comte’s patience almost forsook him, as he continued,--“Your royal
highness danced just now most charmingly.”

“Do you think so?” she replied with indifference.

“Yes; the character which your royal highness assumed is in perfect
harmony with your own.”

Madame again turned round, and, looking De Guiche full in the face with
a bright and steady gaze, said,--“Why so?”

“Oh! there can be no doubt of it.”

“Explain yourself?”

“You represented a divinity, beautiful, disdainful, inconstant.”

“You mean Pomona, comte?”

“I allude to the goddess.”

Madame remained silent for a moment, with her lips compressed, and then
observed,--“But, comte, you, too, are an excellent dancer.”

“Nay, Madame, I am only one of those who are never noticed, or who are
soon forgotten if they ever happen to be noticed.”

With this remark, accompanied by one of those deep sighs which affect
the remotest fibers of one’s being, his heart burdened with sorrow
and throbbing fast, his head on fire, and his gaze wandering, he bowed
breathlessly, and withdrew behind the thicket. The only reply Madame
condescended to make was by slightly raising her shoulders, and, as her
ladies of honor had discreetly retired while the conversation
lasted, she recalled them by a look. The ladies were Mademoiselle de
Tonnay-Charente and Mademoiselle de Montalais.

“Did you hear what the Comte de Guiche said?” the princess inquired.

“No.”

“It really is very singular,” she continued, in a compassionate tone,
“how exile has affected poor M. de Guiche’s wit.” And then, in a louder
voice, fearful lest her unhappy victim might lose a syllable, she
said,--“In the first place he danced badly, and afterwards his remarks
were very silly.”

She then rose, humming the air to which she was presently going to
dance. De Guiche had overheard everything. The arrow pierced his heart
and wounded him mortally. Then, at the risk of interrupting the progress
of the _fete_ by his annoyance, he fled from the scene, tearing his
beautiful costume of Autumn in pieces, and scattering, as he went along,
the branches of vines, mulberry and almond trees, with all the other
artificial attributes of his assumed divinity. A quarter of an hour
afterwards he returned to the theater; but it will be readily believed
that it was only a powerful effort of reason over his great excitement
that enabled him to go back; or perhaps, for love is thus strangely
constituted, he found it impossible even to remain much longer separated
from the presence of one who had broken his heart. Madame was finishing
her figure. She saw, but did not look at De Guiche, who, irritated and
revengeful, turned his back upon her as she passed him, escorted by her
nymphs, and followed by a hundred flatterers. During this time, at the
other end of the theater, near the lake, a young woman was seated, with
her eyes fixed upon one of the windows of the theater, from which were
issuing streams of light--the window in question being that of the royal
box. As De Guiche quitted the theater for the purpose of getting into
the fresh air he so much needed, he passed close to this figure and
saluted her. When she perceived the young man, she rose, like a woman
surprised in the midst of ideas she was desirous of concealing
from herself. De Guiche stopped as he recognized her, and said
hurriedly,--“Good evening, Mademoiselle de la Valliere; I am indeed
fortunate in meeting you.”

“I, also, M. de Guiche, am glad of this accidental meeting,” said the
young girl, as she was about to withdraw.

“Pray do not leave me,” said De Guiche, stretching out his hand towards
her, “for you would be contradicting the kind words you have just
pronounced. Remain, I implore you: the evening is most lovely. You wish
to escape from the merry tumult, and prefer your own society. Well, I
can understand it; all women who are possessed of any feeling do, and
one never finds them dull or lonely when removed from the giddy vortex
of these exciting amusements. Oh! Heaven!” he exclaimed, suddenly.

“What is the matter, monsieur le comte?” inquired La Valliere, with some
anxiety. “You seem agitated.”

“I! oh, no!”

“Will you allow me, M. de Guiche, to return you the thanks I had
proposed to offer you on the very first opportunity? It is to your
recommendation, I am aware, that I owe my admission among the number of
Madame’s maids of honor.”

“Indeed! Ah! I remember now, and I congratulate myself. Do you love any
one?”

“I!” exclaimed La Valliere.

“Forgive me, I hardly know what I am saying; a thousand times forgive
me; Madame was right, quite right, this brutal exile has completely
turned my brain.”

“And yet it seemed to me that the king received you with kindness.”

“Do you think so? Received me with kindness--perhaps so--yes--”

“There cannot be a doubt he received you kindly, for, in fact, you
returned without his permission.”

“Quite true, and I believe you are right. But have you not seen M. de
Bragelonne here?”

La Valliere started at the name. “Why do you ask?” she inquired.

“Have I offended you again?” said De Guiche. “In that case I am indeed
unhappy, and greatly to be pitied.”

“Yes, very unhappy, and very much to be pitied, Monsieur de Guiche, for
you seem to be suffering terribly.”

“Oh! mademoiselle, why have I not a devoted sister, or a true friend,
such as yourself?”

“You have friends, Monsieur de Guiche, and the Vicomte de Bragelonne, of
whom you spoke just now, is, I believe, one of the most devoted.”

“Yes, yes, you are right, he is one of my best friends. Farewell,
Mademoiselle de la Valliere, farewell.” And he fled, like one possessed,
along the banks of the lake. His dark shadow glided, lengthening as it
disappeared, among the illumined yews and glittering undulations of the
water. La Valliere looked after him, saying,--“Yes, yes, he, too, is
suffering, and I begin to understand why.”

She had hardly finished when her companions, Mademoiselle de Montalais
and Mademoiselle de Tonnay-Charente, ran forward. They were released
from their attendance, and had changed their costumes of nymphs;
delighted with the beautiful night, and the success of the evening, they
returned to look after their companion.

“What, already here!” they said to her. “We thought we should be first
at the rendezvous.”

“I have been here this quarter of an hour,” replied La Valliere.

“Did not the dancing amuse you?”

“No.”

“But surely the enchanting spectacle?”

“No more than the dancing. As far as beauty is concerned, I much prefer
that which these dark woods present, in whose depths can be seen, now
in one direction and again in another, a light passing by, as though it
were an eye, in color like a midnight rainbow, sometimes open, at others
closed.”

“La Valliere is quite a poetess,” said Tonnay-Charente.

“In other words,” said Montalais, “she is insupportable. Whenever there
is a question of laughing a little or of amusing ourselves, La Valliere
begins to cry; whenever we girls have reason to cry, because, perhaps,
we have mislaid our dresses, or because our vanity as been wounded, or
our costume fails to produce an effect, La Valliere laughs.”

“As far as I am concerned, that is not my character,” said Mademoiselle
de Tonnay-Charente. “I am a woman; and there are few like me; whoever
loves me, flatters me; whoever flatters me, pleases me; and whoever
pleases--”

“Well!” said Montalais, “you do not finish.”

“It is too difficult,” replied Mademoiselle de Tonnay-Charente, laughing
loudly. “Do you, who are so clever, finish for me.”

“And you, Louise?” said Montalais, “does any one please you?”

“That is a matter that concerns no one but myself,” replied the young
girl, rising from the mossy bank on which she had been reclining during
the whole time the ballet lasted. “Now, mesdemoiselles, we have agreed
to amuse ourselves to-night without any one to overlook us, and without
any escort. We are three in number, we like one another, and the night
is lovely. Look yonder, do you not see the moon slowly rising, silvering
the topmost branches of the chestnuts and the oaks. Oh, beautiful walk!
sweet liberty! exquisite soft turf of the woods, the happiness which
your friendship confers upon me! let us walk arm in arm towards those
large trees. Out yonder all are at this moment seated at table and
fully occupied, or preparing to adorn themselves for a set and formal
promenade; horses are being saddled, or harnessed to the carriages--the
queen’s mules or Madame’s four white ponies. As for ourselves, we shall
soon reach some retired spot where no eyes can see us and no step follow
ours. Do you not remember, Montalais, the woods of Cheverny and of
Chambord, the innumerable rustling poplars of Blois, where we exchanged
our mutual hopes?”

“And confidences too?”

“Yes.”

“Well,” said Mademoiselle de Tonnay-Charente, “I also think a good deal;
but I take care--”

“To say nothing,” said Montalais, “so that when Mademoiselle de
Tonnay-Charente thinks, Athenais is the only one who knows it.”

“Hush!” said Mademoiselle de Tonnay-Charente, “I hear steps approaching
from this side.”

“Quick, quick, then, among the high reed-grass,” said Montalais; “stoop,
Athenais, you are so tall.”

Mademoiselle de Tonnay-Charente stooped as she was told, and, almost at
the same moment, they saw two gentlemen approaching, their heads bent
down, walking arm in arm, on the fine gravel walk running parallel with
the bank. The young girls had, indeed, made themselves small--indeed
invisible.

“It is Monsieur de Guiche,” whispered Montalais in Mademoiselle de
Tonnay-Charente’s ear.

“It is Monsieur de Bragelonne,” whispered the latter to La Valliere.

The two young men approached still closer, conversing in animated tones.
“She was here just now,” said the count. “If I had only seen her, I
should have declared it to be a vision, but I spoke to her.”

“You are positive, then?”

“Yes; but perhaps I frightened her.”

“In what way?”

“Oh! I was still half crazy at you know what; so that she could hardly
have understood what I was saying, and must have grown alarmed.”

“Oh!” said Bragelonne, “do not make yourself uneasy: she is all
kindness, and will excuse you; she is clear-sighted, and will
understand.”

“Yes, but if she should have understood, and understood too well, she
may talk.”

“You do not know Louise, count,” said Raoul. “Louise possesses every
virtue, and has not a single fault.” And the two young men passed on,
and, as they proceeded, their voices were soon lost in the distance.

“How is it, La Valliere,” said Mademoiselle de Tonnay-Charente, “that
the Vicomte de Bragelonne spoke of you as Louise?”

“We were brought up together,” replied Louise, blushing; “M. de
Bragelonne has honored me by asking my hand in marriage, but--”

“Well?”

“It seems the king will not consent to it.”

“Eh! Why the king? and what has the king to do with it?” exclaimed Aure,
sharply. “Good gracious! has the king any right to interfere in matters
of that kind? Politics are politics, as M. de Mazarin used to say; but
love is love. If, therefore, you love M. de Bragelonne, marry him. _I_
give _my_ consent.”

Athenais began to laugh.

“Oh! I am speaking seriously,” replied Montalais, “and my opinion in
this case is quite as good as the king’s, I suppose; is it not, Louise?”

“Come,” said La Valliere, “these gentlemen have passed; let us take
advantage of our being alone to cross the open ground and so take refuge
in the woods.”

“So much the better,” said Athenais, “because I see the torches setting
out from the chateau and the theater, and they seem as if they were
preceding some person of distinction.”

“Let us run, then,” said all three. And, gracefully lifting up the long
skirts of their silk dresses, they lightly ran across the open space
between the lake and the thickest covert of the park. Montalais agile as
a deer, Athenais eager as a young wolf, bounded through the dry grass,
and, now and then, some bold Acteon might, by the aid of the faint
light, have perceived their straight and well-formed limbs somewhat
displayed beneath the heavy folds of their satin petticoats. La
Valliere, more refined and more bashful, allowed her dress to flow
around her; retarded also by the lameness of her foot, it was not long
before she called out to her companions to halt, and, left behind, she
obliged them both to wait for her. At this moment, a man, concealed in
a dry ditch planted with young willow saplings, scrambled quickly up its
shelving side, and ran off in the direction of the chateau. The three
young girls, on their side, reached the outskirts of the park, every
path of which they well knew. The ditches were bordered by high hedges
full of flowers, which on that side protected the foot-passengers from
being intruded upon by the horses and carriages. In fact, the sound of
Madame’s and the queen’s carriages could be heard in the distance upon
the hard dry ground of the roads, followed by the mounted cavaliers.
Distant music reached them in response, and when the soft notes died
away, the nightingale, with throat of pride, poured forth his melodious
chants, and his most complicated, learned, and sweetest compositions
to those who had met beneath the thick covert of the woods. Near the
songster, in the dark background of the large trees, could be seen the
glistening eyes of an owl, attracted by the harmony. In this way
the _fete_ of the whole court was a _fete_ also for the mysterious
inhabitants of the forest; for certainly the deer in the brake, the
pheasant on the branch, the fox in its hole, were all listening. One
could realize the life led by this nocturnal and invisible population
from the restless movements that suddenly took place among the leaves.
Our sylvan nymphs uttered a slight cry, but, reassured immediately
afterwards, they laughed, and resumed their walk. In this manner they
reached the royal oak, the venerable relic of a tree which in its
prime has listened to the sighs of Henry II. for the beautiful Diana of
Poitiers, and later still to those of Henry IV. for the lovely Gabrielle
d’Estrees. Beneath this oak the gardeners had piled up the moss and
turf in such a manner that never had a seat more luxuriously rested the
wearied limbs of man or monarch. The trunk, somewhat rough to recline
against, was sufficiently large to accommodate the three young girls,
whose voices were lost among the branches, which stretched upwards to
the sky.



Chapter XLI. What Was Said under the Royal Oak.

The softness of the air, the stillness of the foliage, tacitly imposed
upon these young girls an engagement to change immediately their giddy
conversation for one of a more serious character. She, indeed, whose
disposition was the most lively,--Montalais, for instance,--was the
first to yield to the influence; and she began by heaving a deep sigh,
and saying:--“What happiness to be here alone, and at liberty, with
every right to be frank, especially towards one another.”

“Yes,” said Mademoiselle de Tonnay-Charente; “for the court, however
brilliant it may be, has always some falsehood concealed beneath the
folds of its velvet robes, or the glitter of its diamonds.”

“I,” replied La Valliere, “I never tell a falsehood; when I cannot speak
the truth, I remain silent.”

“You will not long remain in favor,” said Montalais; “it is not here
as it was at Blois, where we told the dowager Madame all our little
annoyances, and all our longings. There were certain days when Madame
remembered that she herself had been young, and, on those days, whoever
talked with her found in her a sincere friend. She related to us her
flirtations with Monsieur, and we told her of the flirtations she
had had with others, or, at least, the rumors of them that had spread
abroad. Poor woman, so simple-minded! she laughed at them, as we did.
Where is she now?”

“Ah, Montalais,--laughter-loving Montalais!” cried La Valliere; “you
see you are sighing again; the woods inspire you, and you are almost
reasonable this evening.”

“You ought not, either of you,” said Athenais, “to regret the court at
Blois so much, unless you do not feel happy with us. A court is a place
where men and women resort to talk of matters which mothers, guardians,
and especially confessors, severely denounce.”

“Oh, Athenais!” said Louise, blushing.

“Athenais is frank to-night,” said Montalais; “let us avail ourselves of
it.”

“Yes, let us take advantage of it, for this evening I could divulge the
softest secrets of my heart.”

“Ah, if M. Montespan were here!” said Montalais.

“Do you think that I care for M. de Montespan?” murmured the beautiful
young girl.

“He is handsome, I believe?”

“Yes. And that is no small advantage in my eyes.”

“There now, you see--”

“I will go further, and say, that of all the men whom one sees here, he
is the handsomest, and the most--”

“What was that?” said La Valliere, starting suddenly from the mossy
bank.

“A deer hurrying by, perhaps.”

“I am only afraid of men,” said Athenais.

“When they do not resemble M. de Montespan.”

“A truce to raillery. M. de Montespan is attentive to me, but that does
not commit me in any way. Is not M. de Guiche here, he who is so devoted
to Madame?”

“Poor fellow!” said La Valliere.

“Why to be pitied? Madame is sufficiently beautiful, and of high enough
rank, I suppose.”

La Valliere shook her head sorrowfully, saying, “When one loves, it is
neither beauty nor rank;--when one loves it should be the heart, or the
eyes only, of him, or of her whom one loves.”

Montalais began to laugh loudly. “Heart, eyes,” she said; “oh,
sugar-plums!”

“I speak for myself;” replied La Valliere.

“Noble sentiments,” said Athenais, with an air of protection, but with
indifference.

“Are they not your own?” asked Louise.

“Perfectly so; but to continue: how can one pity a man who bestows his
attentions upon such a woman as Madame? If any disproportion exists, it
is on the count’s side.”

“Oh! no, no,” returned La Valliere; “it is on Madame’s side.”

“Explain yourself.”

“I will. Madame has not even a wish to know what love is. She diverts
herself with the feeling, as children do with fireworks, form which a
spark might set a palace on fire. It makes a display, and that is all
she cares about. Besides, pleasure forms the tissue of which she wishes
her life to be woven. M. de Guiche loves this illustrious personage, but
she will never love him.”

Athenais laughed disdainfully. “Do people really ever love?” she said.
“Where are the noble sentiments you just now uttered? Does not a woman’s
virtue consist in the uncompromising refusal of every intrigue that
might compromise her? A properly regulated woman, endowed with a natural
heart, ought to look at men, make herself loved--adored, even, by them,
and say at the very utmost but once in her life, ‘I begin to think that
I ought not to have been what I am,--I should have detested this one
less than others.’”

“Therefore,” exclaimed La Valliere, “that is what M. de Montespan has to
expect.”

“Certainly; he, as well as every one else. What! have I not said that I
admit he possesses a certain superiority, and would not that be enough?
My dear child, a woman is a queen during the entire period nature
permits her to enjoy sovereign power--from fifteen to thirty-five years
of age. After that, we are free to have a heart, when we only have that
left--”

“Oh, oh!” murmured La Valliere.

“Excellent,” cried Montalais; “a very masterly woman; Athenais, you will
make your way in the world.”

“Do you not approve of what I say?”

“Completely,” replied her laughing companion.

“You are not serious, Montalais?” said Louise.

“Yes, yes; I approve everything Athenais has just said; only--”

“Only _what?_”

“Well, I cannot carry it out. I have the firmest principles; I form
resolutions beside which the laws of the Stadtholder and of the King
of Spain are child’s play; but when the moment arrives to put them into
execution, nothing comes of them.”

“Your courage fails?” said Athenais, scornfully.

“Miserably so.”

“Great weakness of nature,” returned Athenais. “But at least you make a
choice.”

“Why, no. It pleases fate to disappoint me in everything; I dream of
emperors, and I find only--”

“Aure, Aure!” exclaimed La Valliere, “for pity’s sake, do not, for the
pleasure of saying something witty, sacrifice those who love you with
such devoted affection.”

“Oh, I do not trouble myself much about that; those who love me are
sufficiently happy that I do not dismiss them altogether. So much the
worse for myself if I have a weakness for any one, but so much the worse
for others if I revenge myself upon them for it.”

“You are right,” said Athenais, “and, perhaps, you too will reach the
goal. In other words, young ladies, that is termed being a coquette.
Men, who are very silly in most things, are particularly so in
confounding, under the term of coquetry, a woman’s pride, and love
of changing her sentiments as she does her dress. I, for instance, am
proud; that is to say, impregnable. I treat my admirers harshly, but
without any pretention to retain them. Men call me a coquette, because
they are vain enough to think I care for them. Other women--Montalais,
for instance--have allowed themselves to be influenced by flattery; they
would be lost were it not for that most fortunate principle of instinct
which urges them to change suddenly, and punish the man whose devotion
they so recently accepted.”

“A very learned dissertation,” said Montalais, in the tone of thorough
enjoyment.

“It is odious!” murmured Louise.

“Thanks to that sort of coquetry, for, indeed, that is genuine
coquetry,” continued Mademoiselle de Tonnay-Charente; “the lover who, a
little while since, was puffed up with pride, in a minute afterwards is
suffering at every pore of his vanity and self-esteem. He was, perhaps,
already beginning to assume the airs of a conqueror, but now he retreats
defeated; he was about to assume an air of protection towards us, but
he is obliged to prostrate himself once more. The result of all this is,
that, instead of having a husband who is jealous and troublesome,
free from restraint in his conduct towards us, we have a lover always
trembling in our presence, always fascinated by our attractions, always
submissive; and for this simple reason, that he finds the same woman
never twice of the same mind. Be convinced, therefore, of the advantages
of coquetry. Possessing that, one reigns a queen among women in cases
where Providence has withheld that precious faculty of holding one’s
heart and mind in check.”

“How clever you are,” said Montalais, “and how well you understand the
duty women owe themselves!”

“I am only settling a case of individual happiness,” said Athenais
modestly; “and defending myself, like all weak, loving dispositions,
against the oppressions of the stronger.”

“La Valliere does not say a word.”

“Does she not approve of what we are saying?”

“Nay; only I do not understand it,” said Louise. “You talk like people
not called upon to live in this world of ours.”

“And very pretty your world is,” said Montalais.

“A world,” returned Athenais, “in which men worship a woman until she
has fallen,--and insult her when she has fallen.”

“Who spoke to you of falling?” said Louise.

“Yours is a new theory, then; will you tell us how you intend to resist
yielding to temptation, if you allow yourself to be hurried away by
feelings of affection?”

“Oh!” exclaimed the young girl, raising towards the dark heavens her
beautiful large eyes filled with tears, “if you did but know what a
heart is, I would explain, and convince you; a loving heart is stronger
than all your coquetry, more powerful than all your pride. A woman is
never truly loved, I believe; a man never loves with idolatry, unless
he feels sure he is loved in return. Let old men, whom we read of in
comedies, fancy themselves adored by coquettes. A young man is conscious
of, and knows them; if he has a fancy, or a strong desire, and an
absorbing passion, for a coquette, he cannot mistake her; a coquette may
drive him out of his senses, but will never make him fall in love. Love,
such as I conceive it to be, is an incessant, complete, and perfect
sacrifice; but it is not the sacrifice of one only of the two persons
thus united. It is the perfect abnegation of two who are desirous of
blending their beings into one. If ever I love, I shall implore my lover
to leave me free and pure; I will tell him, and he will understand, that
my heart was torn by my refusal, and he, in his love for me, aware of
the magnitude of my sacrifice,--he, in his turn, I say, will store his
devotion for me,--will respect me, and will not seek my ruin, to insult
me when I shall have fallen, as you said just now, whilst uttering your
blasphemies against love, such as I understand it. That is my idea of
love. And now you will tell me, perhaps, that my love will despise me; I
defy him to do so, unless he be the vilest of men, and my heart assures
me that it is not such a man I would choose. A look from me will repay
him for the sacrifices he makes, or will inspire him with the virtues
which he would never think he possessed.”

“But, Louise,” exclaimed Montalais, “you tell us this, and do not carry
it into practice.”

“What do you mean?”

“You are adored by Raoul de Bragelonne, who worships you on both knees.
The poor fellow is made the victim of your virtue, just as he would be--
nay, more than he would be, even--of my coquetry, or Athenais’s pride.”

“All this is simply a different shade of coquetry,” said Athenais; “and
Louise, I perceive, is a coquette without knowing it.”

“Oh!” said La Valliere.

“Yes, you may call it instinct, if you please, keenest sensibility,
exquisite refinement of feeling, perpetual play of restrained outbreaks
of affection, which end in smoke. It is very artful too, and very
effective. I should even, now that I reflect upon it, have preferred
this system of tactics to my own pride, for waging war on members of
the other sex, because it offers the advantage sometimes of thoroughly
convincing them; but, at the present moment, without utterly condemning
myself, I declare it to be superior to the non-complex coquetry of
Montalais.” And the two young girls began to laugh.

La Valliere alone preserved silence, and quietly shook her head. Then,
a moment after, she added, “If you were to tell me, in the presence of
a man, but a fourth part of what you have just said, or even if I were
assured that you think it, I should die of shame and grief where I am
now.”

“Very well; die, poor tender little darling,” replied Mademoiselle de
Tonnay-Charente; “for if there are no men here, there are at least two
women, your own friends, who declare you to be attained and convicted of
being a coquette from instinct; in other words, the most dangerous kind
of coquette the world possesses.”

“Oh! mesdemoiselles,” replied La Valliere, blushing, and almost ready to
weep. Her two companions again burst out laughing.

“Very well! I will ask Bragelonne to tell me.”

“Bragelonne?” said Athenais.

“Yes! Bragelonne, who is as courageous as Caesar, and as clever and
witty as M. Fouquet. Poor fellow! for twelve years he has known you,
loved you, and yet--one can hardly believe it--he has never even kissed
the tips of your fingers.”

“Tell us the reason of this cruelty, you who are all heart,” said
Athenais to La Valliere.

“Let me explain it by a single word--virtue. You will perhaps deny the
existence of virtue?”

“Come, Louise, tell us the truth,” said Aure, taking her by the hand.

“What do you wish me to tell you?” cried La Valliere.

“Whatever you like; but it will be useless for you to say anything,
for I persist in my opinion of you. A coquette from instinct; in other
words, as I have already said, and I say it again, the most dangerous of
all coquettes.”

“Oh! no, no; for pity’s sake do not believe that!”

“What! twelve years of extreme severity.”

“How can that be, since twelve years ago I was only five years old?
The frivolity of the child cannot surely be placed to the young girl’s
account.”

“Well! you are now seventeen; three years instead of twelve. During
those three years you have remained constantly and unchangeably cruel.
Against you are arrayed the silent shades of Blois, the meetings when
you diligently conned the stars together, the evening wanderings beneath
the plantain-trees, his impassioned twenty years speaking to your
fourteen summers, the fire of his glances addressed to yourself.”

“Yes, yes; but so it is!”

“Impossible!”

“But why impossible?”

“Tell us something credible and we will believe you.”

“Yet, if you were to suppose one thing.”

“What is that?”

“Suppose that I thought I was in love, and that I am not.”

“What! not in love!”

“Well, then! if I have acted in a different manner to what others do
when they are in love, it is because I do not love; and because my hour
has not yet come.”

“Louise, Louise,” said Montalais, “take care or I will remind you of the
remark you made just now. Raoul is not here; do not overwhelm him while
he is absent; be charitable, and if, on closer inspection, you think you
do not love him, tell him so, poor fellow!” and she began to laugh.

“Louise pitied M. de Guiche just now,” said Athenais; “would it be
possible to detect an explanation of her indifference for the one in
this compassion for the other?”

“Say what you please,” said La Valliere, sadly; “upbraid me as you like,
since you do not understand me.”

“Oh! oh!” replied Montalais, “temper, sorrow, tears; we are jesting,
Louise, and are not, I assure you, quite the monsters you suppose.
Look at the proud Athenais, as she is called; she does not love M. de
Montespan, it is true, but she would be in despair if M. de Montespan
did not continue to love her. Look at me; I laugh at M. Malicorne,
but the poor fellow whom I laugh at knows precisely when he will be
permitted to press his lips upon my hand. And yet the eldest of us is
not twenty yet. What a future before us!”

“Silly, silly girls!” murmured Louise.

“You are quite right,” said Montalais; “and you alone have spoken words
of wisdom.”

“Certainly.”

“I do not dispute it,” replied Athenais. “And so it is clear you do not
love poor M. de Bragelonne?”

“Perhaps she does,” said Montalais; “she is not yet quite certain of it.
But, in any case, listen, Athenais; if M. de Bragelonne is ever free, I
will give you a little friendly advice.”

“What is that?”

“To look at him well before you decide in favor of M. de Montespan.”

“Oh! in that way of considering the subject, M. de Bragelonne is not
the only one whom one could look at with pleasure; M. de Guiche, for
instance, has his value also.”

“He did not distinguish himself this evening,” said Montalais; “and I
know from very good authority that Madame thought him insupportable.”

“M. de Saint-Aignan produced a most brilliant effect, and I am sure that
more than one person who saw him dance this evening will not soon forget
him. Do you not think so, La Valliere?”

“Why do you ask me? I did not see him, nor do I know him.”

“What! you did not see M. de Saint-Aignan? Don’t you know him?”

“No.”

“Come, come, do not affect a virtue more extravagantly excessive than
our vanity!--you have eyes, I suppose?”

“Excellent.”

“Then you must have seen all those who danced this evening.”

“Yes, nearly all.”

“That is a very impertinent ‘nearly all’ for somebody.”

“You must take it for what it is worth.”

“Very well; now, among all those gentlemen whom you saw, which do you
prefer?”

“Yes,” said Montalais, “is it M. de Saint-Aignan, or M. de Guiche, or
M.--”

“I prefer no one; I thought them all about the same.”

“Do you mean, then, that among that brilliant assembly, the first court
in the world, no one pleased you?”

“I do not say that.”

“Tell us, then, who your ideal is?”

“It is not an ideal being.”

“He exists, then?”

“In very truth,” exclaimed La Valliere, aroused and excited; “I cannot
understand you at all. What! you who have a heart as I have, eyes as I
have, and yet you speak of M. de Guiche, of M. de Saint-Aignan, when the
king was there.” These words, uttered in a precipitate manner, and in
an agitated, fervid tone of voice, made her two companions, between whom
she was seated, exclaim in a manner that terrified her, “_The king!_”

La Valliere buried her face in her hands. “Yes,” she murmured; “the
king! the king! Have you ever seen any one to be compared to the king?”

“You were right just now in saying you had excellent eyes, Louise, for
you see a great distance; too far, indeed. Alas! the king is not one
upon whom our poor eyes have a right to hinge themselves.”

“That is too true,” cried La Valliere; “it is not the privilege of all
eyes to gaze upon the sun; but I will look upon him, even were I to be
blinded in doing so.” At this moment, and as though caused by the words
which had just escaped La Valliere’s lips, a rustling of leaves, and of
what sounded like some silken material, was heard behind the adjoining
bushes. The young girls hastily rose, almost terrified out of their
senses. They distinctly saw the leaves move, without being able to see
what it was that stirred them.

“It is a wolf or a wild boar,” cried Montalais; “fly! fly!” The three
girls, in the extremity of terror, fled by the first path that presented
itself, and did not stop until they had reached the verge of the wood.
There, breathless, leaning against each other, feeling their hearts
throb wildly, they endeavored to collect their senses, but could only
succeed in doing so after the lapse of some minutes. Perceiving at last
the lights from the windows of the chateau, they decided to walk towards
them. La Valliere was exhausted with fatigue, and Aure and Athenais were
obliged to support her.

“We have escaped well,” said Montalais.

“I am greatly afraid,” said La Valliere, “that it was something
worse than a wolf. For my part, and I speak as I think, I should have
preferred to have run the risk of being devoured alive by some wild
animal than to have been listened to and overheard. Fool, fool that I
am! How could I have thought, how could I have said what I did?” And
saying this her head bowed like the water tossed plume of a bulrush;
she felt her limbs fail, and her strength abandoning her, and, gliding
almost inanimate from the arms of her companions, sank down upon the
turf.



Chapter XLII. The King’s Uneasiness.

Let us leave poor La Valliere, who had fainted in the arms of her two
companions, and return to the precincts of the royal oak. The young
girls had hardly run twenty paces, when the sound which had so much
alarmed them was renewed among the branches. A man’s figure might
indistinctly be perceived, and putting the branches of the bushes aside,
he appeared upon the verge of the wood, and perceiving that the place
was empty, burst out into a peal of laughter. It is almost superfluous
to add that the form in question was that of a young and handsome
cavalier, who immediately made a sign to another, who thereupon made his
appearance.

“What, sire,” said the second figure, advancing timidly, “has your
majesty put our young sentimentalists to flight?”

“It seems so,” said the king, “and you can show yourself without fear.”

“Take care, sire, you will be recognized.”

“But I tell you they are flown.”

“This is a most fortunate meeting, sire; and, if I dared offer an
opinion to your majesty, we ought to follow them.”

“They are far enough away by this time.”

“They would quickly allow themselves to be overtaken, especially if they
knew who were following them.”

“What do you mean by that, coxcomb that you are?”

“Why, one of them seems to have taken a fancy to me, and another
compared you to the sun.”

“The greater reason why we should not show ourselves, Saint-Aignan. The
sun never shows itself in the night-time.”

“Upon my word, sire, your majesty seems to have very little curiosity.
In your place, I should like to know who are the two nymphs, the two
dryads, the two hamadryads, who have so good an opinion of us.”

“I shall know them again very well, I assure you, without running after
them.”

“By what means?”

“By their voices, of course. They belong to the court, and the one who
spoke of me had a remarkably sweet voice.”

“Ah! your majesty permits yourself to be influenced by flattery.”

“No one will ever say it is a means _you_ make use of.”

“Forgive my stupidity, sire.”

“Come; let us go and look where I told you.”

“Is the passion, then, which your majesty confided to me, already
forgotten?”

“Oh! no, indeed. How is it possible to forget such beautiful eyes as
Mademoiselle de la Valliere has?”

“Yet the other one has a beautiful voice.”

“Which one?”

“The lady who has fallen in love with the sun.”

“M. de Saint-Aignan!”

“Forgive me, sire.”

“Well, I am not sorry you should believe me to be an admirer of sweet
voices as well as of beautiful eyes. I know you to be a terrible talker,
and to-morrow I shall have to pay for the confidence I have shown you.”

“What do you mean, sire?”

“That to-morrow every one will know that I have designs upon this little
La Valliere; but be careful, Saint-Aignan, I have confided my secret to
no one but you, and if any one should speak to me about it, I shall know
who has betrayed my secret.”

“You are angry, sire.”

“No; but you understand I do not wish to compromise the poor girl.”

“Do not be afraid, sire.”

“You promise me, then?”

“I give you my word of honor.”

“Excellent,” thought the king, laughing to himself; “now every one
will know to-morrow that I have been running about after La Valliere
to-night.”

Then, endeavoring to see where he was, he said: “Why we have lost
ourselves.”

“Not quite so bad as that, sire.”

“Where does that gate lead to?”

“To Rond-Point, sire.”

“Where were we going when we heard the sound of women’s voices?”

“Yes, sire, and the termination of a conversation in which I had the
honor of hearing my own name pronounced by the side of your majesty’s.”

“You return to that subject too frequently, Saint-Aignan.”

“Your majesty will forgive me, but I am delighted to know that a woman
exists whose thoughts are occupied about me, without my knowledge,
and without my having done anything to deserve it. Your majesty cannot
comprehend this satisfaction, for your rank and merit attract attention,
and compel regard.”

“No, no, Saint-Aignan, believe me or not, as you like,” said the king,
leaning familiarly upon Saint-Aignan’s arm and taking the path he
thought would lead them to the chateau; “but this candid confession,
this perfectly disinterested preference of one who will, perhaps, never
attract my attention--in one word, the mystery of this adventure excites
me, and the truth is, that if I were not so taken with La Valliere--”

“Do not let that interfere with your majesty’s intentions: you have time
enough before you.”

“What do you mean?”

“La Valliere is said to be very strict in her ideas.”

“You excite my curiosity and I am anxious to see her again. Come, let us
walk on.”

The king spoke untruly, for nothing, on the contrary, could make him
less anxious, but he had a part to play, and so he walked on hurriedly.
Saint-Aignan followed him at a short distance. Suddenly the king
stopped; the courtier followed his example.

“Saint-Aignan,” he said, “do you not hear some one moaning?”

“Yes, sire, and weeping, too, it seems.”

“It is in this direction,” said the king. “It sounds like the tears and
sobs of a woman.”

“Run,” said the king; and, following a by-path, they ran across the
grass. As they approached, the cries were more distinctly heard.

“Help, help,” exclaimed two voices. The king and his companion redoubled
their speed, and, as they approached nearer, the sighs they had
heard were changed into loud sobs. The cry of “Help! help!” was again
repeated; at the sound of which, the king and Saint-Aignan increased the
rapidity of their pace. Suddenly at the other side of a ditch, under
the branches of a willow, they perceived a woman on her knees, holding
another in her arms who seemed to have fainted. A few paces from them,
a third, standing in the middle of the path, was calling for assistance.
Perceiving the two gentlemen, whose rank she could not tell, her cries
for assistance were redoubled. The king, who was in advance of his
companion, leaped across the ditch, and reached the group at the very
moment when, from the end of the path which led to the chateau, a dozen
persons were approaching, who had been drawn to the spot by the
same cries that had attracted the attention of the king and M. de
Saint-Aignan.

“What is the matter, young ladies?” said Louis.

“The king!” exclaimed Mademoiselle de Montalais, in her astonishment,
letting La Valliere’s head fall upon the ground.

“Yes, it is the king; but that is no reason why you should abandon your
companion. Who is she?”

“It is Mademoiselle de la Valliere, sire.”

“Mademoiselle de la Valliere!”

“Yes, sire, she has just fainted.”

“Poor child!” said the king. “Quick, quick, fetch a surgeon.” But
however great the anxiety with which the king had pronounced these words
may have seemed to others, he had not so carefully schooled himself
but that they appeared, as well as the gesture which accompanied them,
somewhat cold to Saint-Aignan, to whom the king had confided the sudden
love with which she had inspired him.

“Saint-Aignan,” continued the king, “watch over Mademoiselle de la
Valliere, I beg. Send for a surgeon. I will hasten forward and inform
Madame of the accident which has befallen one of her maids of honor.”
 And, in fact, while M. de Saint-Aignan was busily engaged in making
preparations for carrying Mademoiselle de la Valliere to the chateau,
the king hurried forward, happy to have an opportunity of approaching
Madame, and of speaking to her under a colorable pretext. Fortunately, a
carriage was passing; the coachman was told to stop, and the persons who
were inside, having been informed of the accident, eagerly gave up their
seats to Mademoiselle de la Valliere. The current of fresh air produced
by the rapid motion of the carriage soon recalled her to her senses.
Having reached the chateau, she was able, though very weak, to
alight from the carriage, and, with the assistance of Athenais and of
Montalais, to reach the inner apartments. They made her sit down in one
of the rooms of the ground floor. After a while, as the accident had not
produced much effect upon those who had been walking, the promenade was
resumed. During this time, the king had found Madame beneath a tree with
overhanging branches, and had seated himself by her side.

“Take care, sire,” said Henrietta to him, in a low tone, “you do not
show yourself as indifferent as you ought to be.”

“Alas!” replied the king, in the same tone, “I much fear we have entered
into an agreement above our strength to keep.” He then added aloud, “You
have heard of the accident, I suppose?”

“What accident?”

“Oh! in seeing you I forgot I hurried here expressly to tell you of it.
I am, however, painfully affected by it; one of your maids of honor,
Mademoiselle de la Valliere, has just fainted.”

“Indeed! poor girl,” said the princess, quietly, “what was the cause of
it?”

She then added in an undertone, “You forget, sire, that you wish others
to believe in your passion for this girl, and yet you remain here while
she is almost dying, perhaps, elsewhere.”

“Ah! Madame,” said the king, sighing, “how much more perfect you are in
your part than I am, and how actively you think of everything.”

He then rose, saying loud enough for every one to hear him, “Permit
me to leave you, Madame; my uneasiness is very great, and I wish to
be quite certain, myself, that proper attention has been given to
Mademoiselle de la Valliere.” And the king left again to return to La
Valliere, while those who had been present commented upon the king’s
remark:--“My uneasiness is very great.”



Chapter XLIII. The King’s Secret.

On his way Louis met the Comte de Saint-Aignan. “Well, Saint-Aignan,” he
inquired, with affected interest, “how is the invalid.”

“Really, sire,” stammered Saint-Aignan, “to my shame, I confess I do not
know.”

“What! you do not know?” said the king, pretending to take in a serious
manner this want of attention for the object of his predilection.

“Will your majesty pardon me; but I have just met one of our three
loquacious wood-nymphs, and I confess that my attention has been taken
away from other matters.”

“Ah!” said the king, eagerly, “you have found, then--”

“The one who deigned to speak of me in such advantageous terms; and,
having found mine, I was searching for yours, sire, when I had the
happiness to meet your majesty.”

“Very well; but Mademoiselle de la Valliere before everything else,”
 said the king, faithful to the character he had assumed.

“Oh! our charming invalid!” said Saint-Aignan; “how fortunately her
fainting fit came on, since your majesty had already occupied yourself
about her.”

“What is the name of your fair lady, Saint-Aignan? Is it a secret?”

“It ought to be a secret, and a very great one, even; but your majesty
is well aware that no secret can possibly exist for you.”

“Well, what is her name?”

“Mademoiselle de Tonnay-Charente.”

“Is she pretty?”

“Exceedingly, sire; and I recognized the voice which pronounced my name
in such tender accents. I accosted her, questioned her as well as I
was able to do, in the midst of the crowd; and she told me, without
suspecting anything, that a little while ago she was under the great
oak, with her two friends, when the sound of a wolf or a robber had
terrified them, and made them run away.”

“But,” inquired the king, anxiously, “what are the names of these two
friends?”

“Sire,” said Saint-Aignan, “will your majesty send me forthwith to the
Bastile?”

“What for?”

“Because I am an egotist and a fool. My surprise was so great at such a
conquest, and at so fortunate a discovery, that I went no further in my
inquiries. Besides, I did not think that your majesty would attach any
very great importance to what you heard, knowing how much your attention
was taken up by Mademoiselle de la Valliere; and then, Mademoiselle de
Tonnay-Charente left me precipitately, to return to Mademoiselle de la
Valliere.”

“Let us hope, then, that I shall be as fortunate as yourself. Come,
Saint-Aignan.”

“Your majesty is ambitions, I perceive, and does not wish to allow any
conquest to escape you. Well, I assure you that I will conscientiously
set about my inquiries; and, moreover, from one or the other of those
Three Graces we shall learn the names of the rest, and by the names
their secrets.”

“I, too,” said the king, “only require to hear her voice to know it
again. Come, let us say no more about it, but show me where poor La
Valliere is.”

“Well,” thought Saint-Aignan, “the king’s regard is beginning to display
itself, and for that girl too. It is extraordinary; I should never have
believed it.” And with this thought passing through his mind, he showed
the king the room to which La Valliere had been carried; the king
entered, followed by Saint-Aignan. In a low chamber, near a large
window looking out upon the gardens, La Valliere, reclining in a large
armchair, was inhaling deep draughts of the perfumed evening breeze.
From the loosened body of her dress, the lace fell in tumbled folds,
mingling with the tresses of her beautiful fair hair, which lay
scattered upon her shoulders. Her languishing eyes were filled with
tears; she seemed as lifeless as those beautiful visions of our dreams,
that pass before the mental eye of the sleeper, half-opening their wings
without moving them, unclosing their lips without a sound escaping
them. The pearl-like pallor of La Valliere possessed a charm it would
be impossible to describe. Mental and bodily suffering had produced
upon her features a soft and noble expression of grief; from the perfect
passiveness of her arms and bust, she more resembled one whose soul had
passed away, than a living being; she seemed not to hear either of
the whisperings which arose from the court. She seemed to be communing
within herself; and her beautiful, delicate hands trembled from time
to time as though at the contact of some invisible touch. She was so
completely absorbed in her reverie, that the king entered without her
perceiving him. At a distance he gazed upon her lovely face, upon which
the moon shed its pure silvery light.

“Good Heavens!” he exclaimed, with a terror he could not control, “she
is dead.”

“No, sire,” said Montalais, in a low voice; “on the contrary, she is
better. Are you not better, Louise?”

But Louise did not answer. “Louise,” continued Montalais, “the king has
deigned to express his uneasiness on your account.”

“The king!” exclaimed Louise, starting up abruptly, as if a stream of
fire had started through her frame to her heart; “the king uneasy about
me?”

“Yes,” said Montalais.

“The king is here, then?” said La Valliere, not venturing to look round
her.

“That voice! that voice!” whispered Louis, eagerly, to Saint-Aignan.

“Yes, it is so,” replied Saint-Aignan; “your majesty is right; it is she
who declared her love for the sun.”

“Hush!” said the king. And then approaching La Valliere, he said, “You
are not well, Mademoiselle de la Valliere? Just now, indeed, in the
park, I saw that you had fainted. How were you attacked?”

“Sire,” stammered out the poor child, pale and trembling, “I really do
not know.”

“You have been walking too far,” said the king; “and fatigue, perhaps--”

“No, sire,” said Montalais, eagerly, answering for her friend, “it could
not be from fatigue, for we passed most of the evening seated beneath
the royal oak.”

“Under the royal oak?” returned the king, starting. “I was not deceived;
it is as I thought.” And he directed a look of intelligence at the
comte.

“Yes,” said Saint-Aignan, “under the royal oak, with Mademoiselle de
Tonnay-Charente.”

“How do you know that?” inquired Montalais.

“In a very simple way. Mademoiselle de Tonnay-Charente told me so.”

“In that case, she probably told you the cause of Mademoiselle de la
Valliere’s fainting?”

“Why, yes; she told me something about a wolf or a robber. I forget
precisely which.” La Valliere listened, her eyes fixed, her bosom
heaving, as if, gifted with an acuteness of perception, she foresaw a
portion of the truth. Louis imagined this attitude and agitation to
be the consequence of a terror only partially reassured. “Nay, fear
nothing,” he said, with a rising emotion which he could not conceal;
“the wolf which terrified you so much was simply a wolf with two legs.”

“It was a man, then!” said Louise; “it was a man who was listening?”

“Suppose it was so, mademoiselle, what great harm was there in his
having listened? Is it likely that, even in your own opinion, you would
have said anything which could not have been listened to?”

La Valliere wrung her hands, and hid her face in them, as if to hide her
blushes. “In Heaven’s name,” she said, “who was concealed there? Who was
listening?”

The king advanced towards her, to take hold of one of her hands. “It
was I,” he said, bowing with marked respect. “Is it likely I could have
frightened you?” La Valliere uttered a loud cry; for the second time
her strength forsook her; and moaning in utter despair, she again fell
lifeless in her chair. The king had just time to hold out his arm; so
that she was partially supported by him. Mademoiselle de Tonnay-Charente
and Montalais, who stood a few paces from the king and La Valliere,
motionless and almost petrified at the recollection of their
conversation with La Valliere, did not even think of offering their
assistance, feeling restrained by the presence of the king, who, with
one knee on the ground, held La Valliere round the waist with his arm.

“You heard, sire!” murmured Athenais. But the king did not reply; he
remained with his eyes fixed upon La Valliere’s half-closed eyes, and
held her quiescent hand in his own.

“Of course,” replied Saint-Aignan, who, on his side, hoping that
Mademoiselle de Tonnay-Charente, too, would faint, advancing towards
her, holding his arms extended,--“of course; we did not even lose a
single word.” But the haughty Athenais was not a woman to faint easily;
she darted a terrible look at Saint-Aignan, and fled. Montalais, with
more courage, advanced hurriedly towards Louise, and received her from
the king’s hands, who was already fast losing his presence of mind, as
he felt his face covered by the perfumed tresses of the seemingly dying
girl. “Excellent,” whispered Saint-Aignan. “This is indeed an adventure;
and it will be my own fault if I am not the first to relate it.”

The king approached him, and, with a trembling voice and a passionate
gesture, said, “Not a syllable, comte.”

The poor king forgot that, only an hour before, he had given him a
similar recommendation, but with the very opposite intention; namely,
that the comte should be indiscreet. It followed, as a matter of course,
that he latter recommendation was quite as unnecessary as the
former. Half an hour afterwards, everybody in Fontainebleau knew that
Mademoiselle de la Valliere had had a conversation under the royal oak
with Montalais and Tonnay-Charente, and that in this conversation she
had confessed her affection for the king. It was known, also, that the
king, after having manifested the uneasiness with which Mademoiselle
de la Valliere’s health had inspired him, had turned pale, and trembled
very much as he received the beautiful girl fainting into his arms; so
that it was quite agreed among the courtiers, that the greatest event of
the period had just been revealed; that his majesty loved Mademoiselle
de la Valliere, and that, consequently, Monsieur could now sleep in
perfect tranquillity. It was this, even, that the queen-mother, as
surprised as the others by the sudden change, hastened to tell the young
queen and Philip d’Orleans. Only she set to work in a different manner,
by attacking them in the following way:--To her daughter-in-law she
said, “See, now, Therese, how very wrong you were to accuse the king;
now it is said he is devoted to some other person; why should there be
any greater truth in the report of to-day than in that of yesterday, or
in that of yesterday than in that of to-day?” To Monsieur, in relating
to him the adventure of the royal oak, she said, “Are you not very
absurd in your jealousies, my dear Philip? It is asserted that the king
is madly in love with that little La Valliere. Say nothing of it to
your wife; for the queen will know all about it very soon.” This latter
confidential communication had an immediate result. Monsieur, who had
regained his composure, went triumphantly to look after his wife, and
it was not yet midnight and the _fete_ was to continue until two in the
morning, he offered her his hand for a promenade. At the end of a few
paces, however, the first thing he did was to disobey his mother’s
injunctions.

“Do not tell any one, the queen least of all,” he said mysteriously,
“what people say about the king.”

“What do they say about him?” inquired Madame.

“That my brother has suddenly fallen in love.”

“With whom?”

“With Mademoiselle de la Valliere.”

As it was dark, Madame could smile at her ease.

“Ah!” she said, “and how long is it since this has been the case?”

“For some days, it seems. But that was nothing but nonsense; it is only
this evening that he has revealed his passion.”

“The king shows his good taste,” said Madame; “in my opinion she is a
very charming girl.”

“I verily believe you are jesting.”

“I! in what way?”

“In any case this passion will make some one very happy, even if it be
only La Valliere herself.”

“Really,” continued the princess, “you speak as if you had read into the
inmost recesses of La Valliere’s heart. Who has told you that she agrees
to return the king’s affection?”

“And who has told you that she will not return it?”

“She loves the Vicomte de Bragelonne.”

“You think so?”

“She is even affianced to him.”

“She was so.”

“What do you mean?”

“When they went to ask the king’s permission to arrange the marriage, he
refused his permission.”

“Refused?”

“Yes, although the request was preferred by the Comte de la Fere
himself, for whom the king has the greatest regard, on account of the
part he took in your royal brother’s restoration, and in other events,
also, which happened a long time ago.”

“Well! the poor lovers must wait until the king is pleased to change his
opinion; they are young, and there is time enough.”

“But, dear me,” said Philip, laughing, “I perceive you do not know the
best part of the affair.”

“No!”

“That by which the king was most deeply touched.”

“The king, do you say, has been deeply touched?”

“To the very quick of his heart.”

“But how?--in what manner?--tell me directly.”

“By an adventure, the romance of which cannot be equalled.”

“You know how I love to hear of such adventures, and yet you keep me
waiting,” said the princess, impatiently.

“Well, then--” and Monsieur paused.

“I am listening.”

“Under the royal oak--you know where the royal oak is?”

“What can that matter? Under the royal oak, you were saying?”

“Well! Mademoiselle de la Valliere, fancying herself to be alone with
her two friends, revealed to them her affection for the king.”

“Ah!” said Madame, beginning to be uneasy, “her affection for the king?”

“Yes.”

“When was this?”

“About an hour ago.”

Madame started, and then said, “And no one knew of this affection?”

“No one.”

“Not even his majesty?”

“Not even his majesty. The artful little puss kept her secret strictly
to herself, when suddenly it proved stronger than herself, and so
escaped her.”

“And from whom did you get this absurd tale?”

“Why, as everybody else did, from La Valliere herself, who confessed her
love to Montalais and Tonnay-Charente, who were her companions.”

Madame stopped suddenly, and by a hasty movement let go her husband’s
hand.

“Did you say it was an hour ago she made this confession?” Madame
inquired.

“About that time.”

“Is the king aware of it?”

“Why, that is the very thing which constitutes the perfect romance of
the affair, for the king was behind the royal oak with Saint-Aignan, and
heard the whole of the interesting conversation without losing a single
word of it.”

Madame felt struck to the heart, saying incautiously, “But I have seen
the king since, and he never told me a word about it.”

“Of course,” said Monsieur; “he took care not to speak of it to you
himself, since he recommended every one not to say a word about it.”

“What do you mean?” said Madame, growing angry.

“I mean that they wished to keep you in ignorance of the affair
altogether.”

“But why should they wish to conceal it from me?”

“From the fear that your friendship for the young queen might induce you
to say something about it to her, nothing more.”

Madame hung down her head; her feelings were grievously wounded. She
could not enjoy a moment’s repose until she had met the king. As a king
is, most naturally, the very last person in his kingdom who knows what
is said about him, in the same way that a lover is the only one who is
kept in ignorance of what is said about his mistress, therefore, when
the king perceived Madame, who was looking for him, he approached her
in some perturbation, but still gracious and attentive in his manner.
Madame waited for him to speak about La Valliere first; but as he did
not speak of her, she said, “And the poor girl?”

“What poor girl?” said the king.

“La Valliere. Did you not tell me, sire, that she had fainted?”

“She is still very ill,” said the king, affecting the greatest
indifference.

“But surely that will prejudicially affect the rumor you were going to
spread, sire?”

“What rumor?”

“That your attention was taken up by her.”

“Oh!” said the king, carelessly, “I trust it will be reported all the
same.”

Madame still waited; she wished to know if the king would speak to her
of the adventure of the royal oak. But the king did not say a word about
it. Madame, on her side, did not open her lips about it; so that the
king took leave of her without having reposed the slightest confidence
in her. Hardly had she watched the king move away, than she set out in
search of Saint-Aignan. Saint-Aignan was never very difficult to find;
he was like the smaller vessels that always follow in the wake of, and
as tenders to, the larger ships. Saint-Aignan was the very man whom
Madame needed in her then state of mind. And as for him, he only looked
for worthier ears than others he had found to have an opportunity of
recounting the event in all its details. And so he did not spare Madame
a single word of the whole affair. When he had finished, Madame said to
him, “Confess, now, that is his all a charming invention.”

“Invention, no; a true story, yes.”

“Confess, whether invention or true story, that it was told to you as
you have told it to me, but that you were not there.”

“Upon my honor, Madame, I was there.”

“And you think that these confessions may have made an impression on the
king?”

“Certainly, as those of Mademoiselle de Tonnay-Charente did upon me,”
 replied Saint-Aignan; “do not forget, Madame, that Mademoiselle de la
Valliere compared the king to the sun; that was flattering enough.”

“The king does not permit himself to be influenced by such flatteries.”

“Madame, the king is just as much Adonis as Apollo; and I saw plain
enough just now when La Valliere fell into his arms.”

“La Valliere fell into the king’s arms!”

“Oh! it was the most graceful picture possible; just imagine, La
Valliere had fallen back fainting, and--”

“Well! what did you see?--tell me--speak!”

“I saw what ten other people saw at the same time as myself; I saw that
when La Valliere fell into his arms, the king almost fainted himself.”

Madame smothered a subdued cry, the only indication of her smothered
anger.

“Thank you,” she said, laughing in a convulsive manner, “you relate
stories delightfully, M. de Saint-Aignan.” And she hurried away, alone,
and almost suffocated by painful emotion, towards the chateau.



Chapter XLIV. Courses de Nuit.

Monsieur quitted the princess in the best possible humor, and feeling
greatly fatigued, retired to his apartments, leaving every one to finish
the night as he chose. When in his room, Monsieur began to dress for the
night with careful attention, which displayed itself from time to time
in paroxysms of satisfaction. While his attendants were engaged in
curling his hair, he sang the principal airs of the ballet which the
violins had played, and to which the king had danced. He then summoned
his tailors, inspected his costumes for the next day, and, in token of
his extreme satisfaction, distributed various presents among them. As,
however, the Chevalier de Lorraine, who had seen the prince return to
the chateau, entered the room, Monsieur overwhelmed him with kindness.
The former, after having saluted the prince, remained silent for a
moment, like a sharpshooter who deliberates before deciding in what
direction he will renew his fire; then, seeming to make up his mind, he
said, “Have you remarked a very singular coincidence, monseigneur?”

“No; what is it?”

“The bad reception which his majesty, in appearance, gave the Comte de
Guiche.”

“In appearance?”

“Yes, certainly; since, in reality, he has restored him to favor.”

“I did not notice it,” said the prince.

“What, did you not remark, that, instead of ordering him to go away
again into exile, as was natural, he encouraged him in his opposition by
permitting him to resume his place in the ballet?”

“And you think the king was wrong, chevalier?” said the prince.

“Are you not of my opinion, prince?”

“Not altogether so, my dear chevalier; and I think the king was quite
right not to have made a disturbance against a poor fellow whose want of
judgment is more to be complained of than his intention.”

“Really,” said the chevalier, “as far as I am concerned, I confess that
this magnanimity astonishes me to the highest degree.”

“Why so?” inquired Philip.

“Because I should have thought the king had been more jealous,” replied
the chevalier, spitefully. During the last few minutes Monsieur had
felt there was something of an irritating nature concealed under his
favorite’s remarks; this last word, however, ignited the powder.

“Jealous!” exclaimed the prince. “Jealous! what do you mean? Jealous of
what, if you please--or jealous of whom?”

The chevalier perceived that he had allowed an excessively mischievous
remark to escape him, as he was in the habit of doing. He endeavored,
therefore, apparently to recall it while it was still possible to do so.
“Jealous of his authority,” he said, with an assumed frankness; “of what
else would you have the king jealous?”

“Ah!” said the prince, “that’s very proper.”

“Did your royal highness,” continued the chevalier, “solicit dear De
Guiche’s pardon?”

“No, indeed,” said Monsieur. “De Guiche is an excellent fellow, and full
of courage; but as I do not approve of his conduct with Madame, I wish
him neither harm nor good.”

The chevalier had assumed a bitterness with regard to De Guiche, as he
had attempted to do with regard to the king; but he thought he perceived
that the time for indulgence, and even for the utmost indifference,
had arrived, and that, in order to throw some light on the question, it
might be necessary for him to put the lamp, as the saying is, beneath
the husband’s very nose.

“Very well, very well,” said the chevalier to himself, “I must wait for
De Wardes; he will do more in one day than I in a month; for I verily
believe he is even more envious than I. Then, again, it is not De Wardes
I require so much as that some event or another should happen; and in
the whole of this affair I see none. That De Guiche returned after he
had been sent away is certainly serious enough, but all its seriousness
disappears when I learn that De Guiche has returned at the very moment
Madame troubles herself no longer about him. Madame, in fact, is
occupied with the king, that is clear; but she will not be so much
longer if, as it is asserted, the king has ceased to trouble his
head about her. The moral of the whole matter is, to remain perfectly
neutral, and await the arrival of some new caprice and let that
decide the whole affair.” And the chevalier thereupon settled himself
resignedly in the armchair in which Monsieur permitted him to seat
himself in his presence, and, having no more spiteful or malicious
remarks to make, the consequence was that De Lorraine’s wit seemed to
have deserted him. Most fortunately Monsieur was in high good-humor,
and he had enough for two, until the time arrived for dismissing
his servants and gentlemen of the chamber, and he passed into his
sleeping-apartment. As he withdrew, he desired the chevalier to
present his compliments to Madame, and say that, as the night was cool,
Monsieur, who was afraid of the toothache, would not venture out again
into the park during the remainder of the evening. The chevalier entered
the princess’s apartments at the very moment she came in herself. He
acquitted himself faithfully of the commission intrusted to him, and, in
the first place, remarked all the indifference and annoyance with
which Madame received her husband’s communication--a circumstance which
appeared to him fraught with something fresh. If Madame had been about
to leave her apartments with that strangeness of manner, he would have
followed her; but she was returning to them; there was nothing to
be done, therefore he turned upon his heel like an unemployed heron,
appearing to question earth, air, and water about it; shook his head,
and walked away mechanically in the direction of the gardens. He had
hardly gone a hundred paces when he met two young men, walking arm in
arm, with their heads bent down, and idly kicking the small stones out
of their path as they walked on, plunged in thought. It was De Guiche
and De Bragelonne, the sight of whom, as it always did, produced upon
the chevalier, instinctively, a feeling of repugnance. He did not,
however, the less, on that account, salute them with a very low bow,
which they returned with interest. Then, observing that the park was
nearly deserted, that the illuminations began to burn out, and that the
morning breeze was setting in, he turned to the left, and entered the
chateau again, by one of the smaller courtyards. The others turned aside
to the right, and continued on their way towards the large park. As the
chevalier was ascending the side staircase, which led to the private
entrance, he saw a woman, followed by another, make her appearance under
the arcade which led from the small to the large courtyard. The two
women walked so fast that the rustling of their dresses could be
distinguished through the silence of the night. The style of their
mantles, their graceful figures, a mysterious yet haughty carriage which
distinguished them both, especially the one who walked first, struck the
chevalier.

“I certainly know those two,” he said to himself, pausing upon the top
step of the small staircase. Then, as with the instinct of a bloodhound
he was about to follow them, one of the servants who had been running
after him arrested his attention.

“Monsieur,” he said, “the courier has arrived.”

“Very well,” said the chevalier, “there is time enough; to-morrow will
do.”

“There are some urgent letters which you would be glad to see, perhaps.”

“Where from?” inquired the chevalier.

“One from England, and the other from Calais; the latter arrived by
express, and seems of great importance.”

“From Calais! Who the deuce can have to write to me from Calais?”

“I think I recognize the handwriting of Monsieur le Comte de Wardes.”

“Oh!” cried the chevalier, forgetting his intention of acting the
spy, “in that case I will come up at once.” This he did, while the two
unknown beings disappeared at the end of the court opposite to the one
by which they had just entered. We shall now follow them, and leave the
chevalier undisturbed to his correspondence. When they had arrived at
the grove of trees, the foremost of the two halted, somewhat out of
breath, and, cautiously raising her hood, said, “Are we still far from
the tree?”

“Yes, Madame, more than five hundred paces; but pray rest awhile, you
will not be able to walk much longer at this rate.”

“You are right,” said the princes, for it was she; and she leaned
against a tree. “And now,” she resumed, after having recovered her
breath, “tell me the whole truth, and conceal nothing from me.”

“Oh, Madame,” cried the young girl, “you are already angry with me.”

“No, my dear Athenais, reassure yourself, I am in no way angry with you.
After all, these things do not concern me personally. You are anxious
about what you may have said under the oak; you are afraid of having
offended the king, and I wish to tranquillize you by ascertaining myself
if it were possible you could have been overheard.”

“Oh, yes, Madame, the king was close to us.”

“Still, you were not speaking so loud that some of your remarks may not
have been lost.”

“We thought we were quite alone, Madame.”

“There were three of you, you say?”

“Yes; La Valliere, Montalais, and myself.”

“And _you_, individually, spoke in a light manner of the king?”

“I am afraid so. Should such be the case, will your highness have the
kindness to make my peace with his majesty?”

“If there should be any occasion for it, I promise you I will do so.
However, as I have already told you, it will be better not to anticipate
evil. The night is now very dark, and the darkness is still greater
under the trees. It is not likely you were recognized by the king. To
inform him of it, by being the first to speak, is to denounce yourself.”

“Oh, Madame, Madame! if Mademoiselle de la Valliere were recognized,
I must have been recognized also. Besides, M. de Saint-Aignan left no
doubt on the subject.”

“Did you, then, say anything very disrespectful of the king?”

“Not at all; it was one of the others who made some very flattering
speeches about the king; and my remarks must have been much in contrast
with hers.”

“Montalais is such a giddy girl,” said Madame.

“It was not Montalais. Montalais said nothing; it was La Valliere.”

Madame started as if she had not known it perfectly well already. “No,
no,” she said, “the king cannot have heard. Besides, we will now try the
experiment for which we came out. Show me the oak. Do you know where it
is?” she continued.

“Alas! Madame, yes.”

“And you can find it again?”

“With my eyes shut.”

“Very well; sit down on the bank where you were, where La Valliere was,
and speak in the same tone and to the same effect as you did before; I
will conceal myself in the thicket, and if I can hear you, I will tell
you so.”

“Yes, Madame.”

“If, therefore, you really spoke loud enough for the king to have heard
you, in that case--”

Athenais seemed to await the conclusion of the sentence with some
anxiety.

“In that case,” said Madame, in a suffocated voice, arising doubtless
from her hurried progress, “in that case, I forbid you--” And Madame
again increased her pace. Suddenly, however, she stopped. “An idea
occurs to me,” she said.

“A good idea, no doubt, Madame,” replied Mademoiselle de
Tonnay-Charente.

“Montalais must be as much embarrassed as La Valliere and yourself.”

“Less so, for she is less compromised, having said less.”

“That does not matter; she will help you, I dare say, by deviating a
little from the exact truth.”

“Especially if she knows that your highness is kind enough to interest
yourself about me.”

“Very well, I think I have discovered what it is best for you all to
pretend.”

“How delightful.”

“You had better say that all three of you were perfectly well aware that
the king was behind the tree, or behind the thicket, whichever it might
have been; and that you knew M. de Saint-Aignan was there too.”

“Yes, Madame.”

“For you cannot disguise it from yourself, Athenais, Saint-Aignan takes
advantage of some very flattering remarks you made about him.”

“Well, Madame, you see very clearly that one can be overheard,” cried
Athenais, “since M. de Saint-Aignan overheard us.”

Madame bit her lips, for she had thoughtlessly committed herself. “Oh,
you know Saint-Aignan’s character very well,” she said, “the favor the
king shows him almost turns his brain, and he talks at random; not only
so, he very often invents. That is not the question; the fact remains,
did or did not the king overhear?”

“Oh, yes, Madame, he certainly did,” said Athenais, in despair.

“In that case, do what I said: maintain boldly that all three of you
knew--mind, all three of you, for if there is a doubt about any one of
you, there will be a doubt about all,--persist, I say, that you knew
that the king and M. de Saint-Aignan were there, and that you wished to
amuse yourself at the expense of those who were listening.”

“Oh, Madame, at the _king’s_ expense; we shall never dare say that!”

“It is a simple jest; an innocent deception readily permitted in young
girls whom men wish to take by surprise. In this manner everything
explains itself. What Montalais said of Malicorne, a mere jest; what you
said of M. de Saint-Aignan, a mere jest too; and what La Valliere might
have said of--”

“And which she would have given anything to recall.”

“Are you sure of that?”

“Perfectly.”

“Very well, an additional reason. Say the whole affair was a mere
joke. M. de Malicorne will have no occasion to get out of temper; M.
de Saint-Aignan will be completely put out of countenance; _he_ will be
laughed at instead of you; and lastly, the king will be punished for a
curiosity unworthy of his rank. Let people laugh a little at the king in
this affair, and I do not think he will complain of it.”

“Oh, Madame, you are indeed an angel of goodness and sense!”

“It is to my own advantage.”

“In what way?”

“How can you ask me why it is to my advantage to spare my maids of honor
the remarks, annoyances, perhaps even calumnies, that might follow?
Alas! you well know that the court has no indulgence for this sort of
peccadillo. But we have now been walking for some time, shall we be long
before we reach it?”

“About fifty or sixty paces further; turn to the left, Madame, if you
please.”

“And you are sure of Montalais?” said Madame.

“Oh, certainly.”

“Will she do what you ask her?”

“Everything. She will be delighted.”

“And La Valliere--” ventured the princess.

“Ah, there will be some difficulty with her, Madame; she would scorn to
tell a falsehood.”

“Yet, when it is in her interest to do so--”

“I am afraid that that would not make the slightest difference in her
ideas.”

“Yes, yes,” said Madame. “I have been already told that; she is one of
those overnice and affectedly particular people who place heaven in the
foreground in order to conceal themselves behind it. But if she refuses
to tell a falsehood,--as she will expose herself to the jests of the
whole court, as she will have annoyed the king by a confession as
ridiculous as it was immodest,--Mademoiselle la Baume le Blanc de la
Valliere will think it but proper I should send her back again to her
pigeons in the country, in order that, in Touraine yonder, or in Le
Blaisois,--I know not where it may be,--she may at her ease study
sentiment and pastoral life combined.”

These words were uttered with a vehemence and harshness that terrified
Mademoiselle de Tonnay-Charente; and the consequence was, that, as far
as she was concerned, she promised to tell as many falsehoods as might
be necessary. It was in this frame of mind that Madame and her companion
reached the precincts of the royal oak.

“Here we are,” said Tonnay-Charente.

“We shall soon learn if one can overhear,” replied Madame.

“Hush!” whispered the young girl, holding Madame back with a hurried
gesture, entirely forgetful of her companion’s rank. Madame stopped.

“You see that you can hear,” said Athenais.

“How?”

“Listen.”

Madame held her breath; and, in fact, the following words pronounced by
a gentle and melancholy voice, floated towards them:

“I tell you, vicomte, I tell you I love her madly; I tell you I love her
to distraction.”

Madame started at the voice; and, beneath her hood, a bright joyous
smile illumined her features. It was she who now held back her
companion, and with a light step leading her some twenty paces away,
that is to say, out of the reach of the voice, she said, “Remain here,
my dear Athenais, and let no one surprise us. I think it must be you
they are conversing about.”

“Me, Madame?”

“Yes, you--or rather your adventure. I will go and listen; if we were
both there, we should be discovered. Or, stay!--go and fetch Montalais,
and then return and wait for me with her at the entrance of the forest.”
 And then, as Athenais hesitated, she again said “Go!” in a voice which
did not admit of reply. Athenais thereupon arranged her dress so as to
prevent its rustling being heard; and, by a path beyond the group of
trees, she regained the flower-garden. As for Madame, she concealed
herself in the thicket, leaning her back against a gigantic
chestnut-tree, one of the branches of which had been cut in such
a manner as to form a seat, and waited there, full of anxiety and
apprehension. “Now,” she said, “since one can hear from this place, let
us listen to what M. de Bragelonne and that other madly-in-love fool,
the Comte de Guiche, have to say about me.”



Chapter XLV. In Which Madame Acquires a Proof that Listeners Hear What
Is Said.

There was a moment’s silence, as if the mysterious sounds of night were
hushed to listen, at the same time as Madame, to the youthful passionate
disclosures of De Guiche.

Raoul was about to speak. He leaned indolently against the trunk of the
large oak, and replied in his sweet and musical voice, “Alas, my dear De
Guiche, it is a great misfortune.”

“Yes,” cried the latter, “great indeed.”

“You do not understand me, De Guiche. I say that it is a great
misfortune for you, not merely loving, but not knowing how to conceal
your love.”

“What do you mean?” said De Guiche.

“Yes, you do not perceive one thing; namely, that it is no longer to the
only friend you have,--in other words,--to a man who would rather die
than betray you; you do not perceive, I say, that it is no longer to
your only friend that you confide your passion, but to the first person
that approaches you.”

“Are you mad, Bragelonne,” exclaimed De Guiche, “to say such a thing to
me?”

“The fact stands thus, however.”

“Impossible! How, in what manner can I have ever been indiscreet to such
an extent?”

“I mean, that your eyes, your looks, your sighs, proclaim, in spite of
yourself, that exaggerated feeling which leads and hurries a man beyond
his own control. In such a case he ceases to be master of himself; he is
a prey to a mad passion, that makes him confide his grief to the trees,
or to the air, from the very moment he has no longer any living being in
reach of his voice. Besides, remember this: it very rarely happens that
there is not always some one present to hear, especially the very things
which ought _not_ to be heard.” De Guiche uttered a deep sigh. “Nay,”
 continued Bragelonne, “you distress me; since your return here, you have
a thousand times, and in a thousand different ways, confessed your love
for her; and yet, had you not said one word, your return alone would
have been a terrible indiscretion. I persist, then, in drawing this
conclusion; that if you do not place a better watch over yourself than
you have hitherto done, one day or other something will happen that will
cause an explosion. Who will save you then? Answer me. Who will save
her? for, innocent as she will be of your affection, your affection will
be an accusation against her in the hands of her enemies.”

“Alas!” murmured De Guiche; and a deep sigh accompanied the exclamation.

“That is not answering me, De Guiche.”

“Yes, yes.”

“Well, what reply have you to make?”

“This, that when the day arrives I shall be no more a living being than
I feel myself now.”

“I do not understand you.”

“So many vicissitudes have worn me out. At present, I am no more a
thinking, acting being; at present, the most worthless of men is
better than I am; my remaining strength is exhausted, my latest-formed
resolutions have vanished, and I abandon myself to my fate. When a man
is out campaigning, as we have been together, and he sets off alone and
unaccompanied for a skirmish, it sometimes happens that he may meet with
a party of five or six foragers, and although alone, he defends himself;
afterwards, five or six others arrive unexpectedly, his anger is aroused
and he persists; but if six, eight, or ten others should still be met
with, he either sets spurs to his horse, if he should still happen to
retain one, or lets himself be slain to save an ignominious flight.
Such, indeed, is my own case: first, I had to struggle against myself;
afterwards, against Buckingham; now, since the king is in the field, I
will not contend against the king, nor even, I wish you to understand,
will the king retire; nor even against the nature of that woman. Still
I do not deceive myself; having devoted myself to the service of such a
love, I will lose my life in it.”

“It is not the lady you ought to reproach,” replied Raoul; “it is
yourself.”

“Why so?”

“You know the princess’s character,--somewhat giddy, easily captivated
by novelty, susceptible to flattery, whether it come from a blind person
or a child, and yet you allow your passion for her to eat your very life
away. Look at her,--love her, if you will,--for no one whose heart is
not engaged elsewhere can see her without loving her. Yet, while you
love her, respect, in the first place, her husband’s rank, then herself,
and lastly, your own safety.”

“Thanks, Raoul.”

“What for?”

“Because, seeing how much I suffer through this woman, you endeavor
to console me, because you tell me all the good of her you think, and
perhaps even that which you do not think.”

“Oh,” said Raoul, “there you are wrong, comte; what I think I do not
always say, but in that case I say nothing; but when I speak, I know not
how to feign or to deceive; and whoever listens to me may believe me.”

During this conversation, Madame, her head stretched forward with
eager ear and dilated glance, endeavoring to penetrate the obscurity,
thirstily drank in the faintest sound of their voices.

“Oh, I know her better than you do, then!” exclaimed Guiche. “She is not
merely giddy, but frivolous; she is not only attracted by novelty,
she is utterly oblivious, and is without faith; she is not simply
susceptible to flattery, she is a practiced and cruel coquette. A
thorough coquette! yes, yes, I am sure of it. Believe me, Bragelonne,
I am suffering all the torments of hell; brave, passionately fond of
danger, I meet a danger greater than my strength and my courage. But,
believe me, Raoul, I reserve for myself a victory which shall cost her
floods of tears.”

“A victory,” he asked, “and of what kind?”

“Of what kind, you ask?”

“Yes.”

“One day I will accost her, and will address her thus: ‘I was young--
madly in love, I possessed, however, sufficient respect to throw myself
at your feet, and to prostrate myself in the dust, if your looks had not
raised me to your hand. I fancied I understood your looks, I rose, and
then, without having done anything more towards you than love you yet
more devotedly, if that were possible--you, a woman without heart,
faith, or love, in very wantonness, dashed me down again from sheer
caprice. You are unworthy, princess of the royal blood though you may
be, of the love of a man of honor; I offer my life as a sacrifice for
having loved you too tenderly, and I die despairing you.’”

“Oh!” cried Raoul, terrified at the accents of profound truth which De
Guiche’s words betrayed, “I was right in saying you were mad, Guiche.”

“Yes, yes,” exclaimed De Guiche, following out his own idea; “since
there are no wars here now, I will flee yonder to the north, seek
service in the Empire, where some Hungarian, or Croat, or Turk, will
perhaps kindly put me out of my misery.” De Guiche did not finish, or
rather as he finished, a sound made him start, and at the same moment
caused Raoul to leap to his feet. As for De Guiche, buried in his own
thoughts, he remained seated, with his head tightly pressed between his
hands. The branches of the tree were pushed aside, and a woman, pale and
much agitated, appeared before the two young men. With one hand she
held back the branches, which would have struck her face, and, with the
other, she raised the hood of the mantle which covered her shoulders.
By her clear and lustrous glance, by her lofty carriage, by her haughty
attitude, and, more than all that, by the throbbing of his own heart, De
Guiche recognized Madame, and, uttering a loud cry, he removed his hands
from his temple, and covered his eyes with them. Raoul, trembling and
out of countenance, merely muttered a few words of respect.

“Monsieur de Bragelonne,” said the princess, “have the goodness, I beg,
to see if my attendants are not somewhere yonder, either in the walks or
in the groves; and you, M. de Guiche, remain here: I am tired, and you
will perhaps give me your arm.”

Had a thunderbolt fallen at the feet of the unhappy young man, he would
have been less terrified than by her cold and severe tone. However, as
he himself had just said, he was brave; and as in the depths of his own
heart he had just decisively made up his mind, De Guiche arose, and,
observing Bragelonne’s hesitation, he turned towards him a glance full
of resignation and grateful acknowledgement. Instead of immediately
answering Madame, he even advanced a step towards the vicomte, and
holding out the arm which the princess had just desired him to give her,
he pressed his friend’s hand in his own, with a sigh, in which he seemed
to give to friendship all the life that was left in the depths of his
heart. Madame, who in her pride had never known what it was to wait, now
waited until this mute colloquy was at an end. Her royal hand remained
suspended in the air, and, when Raoul had left, it sank without anger,
but not without emotion, in that of De Guiche. They were alone in the
depths of the dark and silent forest, and nothing could be heard but
Raoul’s hastily retreating footsteps along the obscure paths. Over their
heads was extended the thick and fragrant vault of branches, through the
occasional openings of which the stars could be seen glittering in their
beauty. Madame softly drew De Guiche about a hundred paces away from
that indiscreet tree which had heard, and had allowed so many things to
be heard, during the evening, and, leading him to a neighboring glade,
so that they could see a certain distance around them, she said in a
trembling voice, “I have brought you here, because yonder where you
were, everything can be overheard.”

“Everything can be overheard, did you say, Madame?” replied the young
man, mechanically.

“Yes.”

“Which means--” murmured De Guiche.

“Which means that I have heard every syllable you have said.”

“Oh, Heaven! this only was wanting to destroy me,” stammered De Guiche;
and he bent down his head, like an exhausted swimmer beneath the wave
which engulfs him.

“And so,” she said, “you judge me as you have said?” De Guiche grew
pale, turned his head aside, and was silent. He felt almost on the point
of fainting.

“I do not complain,” continued the princess, in a tone of voice full
of gentleness; “I prefer a frankness that wounds me, to flattery, which
would deceive me. And so, according to your opinion, M. de Guiche, I am
a coquette, an a worthless creature.”

“Worthless,” cried the young man; “you worthless! Oh, no; most certainly
I did not say, I could not have said, that that which was the most
precious object in life for me could be worthless. No, no; I did not say
that.”

“A woman who sees a man perish, consumed by the fire she has kindled,
and who does not allay that fire, is, in my opinion, a worthless woman.”

“What can it matter to you what I said?” returned the comte. “What am
I compared to you, and why should you even trouble yourself to know
whether I exist or not?”

“Monsieur de Guiche, both you and I are human beings, and, knowing you
as I do, I do not wish you to risk your life; with you I will change
my conduct and character. I will be, not frank, for I am always so, but
truthful. I implore you, therefore, to love me no more, and to forget
utterly that I have ever addressed a word or a glance towards you.”

De Guiche turned around, bending a look full of passionate devotion upon
her. “You,” he said; “_you_ excuse yourself; _you_ implore me?”

“Certainly; since I have done evil, I ought to repair the evil I have
done. And so, comte, this is what we will agree to. You will forgive my
frivolity and my coquetry. Nay, do not interrupt me. I will forgive
you for having said I was frivolous and a coquette, or something worse,
perhaps; and you will renounce your idea of dying, and will preserve for
your family, for the king, and for our sex, a cavalier whom every one
esteems, and whom many hold dear.” Madame pronounced this last word
in such an accent of frankness, and even of tenderness, that poor De
Guiche’s heart felt almost bursting.

“Oh! Madame, Madame!” he stammered out.

“Nay, listen further,” she continued. “When you shall have renounced
all thought of me forever, from necessity in the first place, and,
next, because you will yield to my entreaty, then you will judge me more
favorably, and I am convinced you will replace this love--forgive the
frivolity of the expression--by a sincere friendship, which you will
be ready to offer me, and which, I promise you, shall be cordially
accepted.”

De Guiche, his forehead bedewed with perspiration, a feeling of death
in his heart, and a trembling agitation through his whole frame, bit
his lip, stamped his foot on the ground, and, in a word, devoured
the bitterness of his grief. “Madame,” he said, “what you offer is
impossible, and I cannot accept such conditions.”

“What!” said Madame, “do you refuse my friendship, then?”

“No, no! I do not need your friendship, Madame. I prefer to die from
love, than to live for friendship.”

“Comte!”

“Oh! Madame,” cried De Guiche, “the present is a moment for me, in
which no other consideration and no other respect exist, than the
consideration and respect of a man of honor towards the woman he
worships. Drive me away, curse me, denounce me, you will be perfectly
right. I have uttered complaints against you, but their bitterness has
been owing to my passion for you; I have said I wish to die, and die I
will. If I lived, you would forget me; but dead, you would never forget
me, I am sure.”

Henrietta, who was standing buried in thought, and nearly as agitated as
De Guiche himself, turned aside her head as but a minute before he had
turned aside his. Then, after a moment’s pause, she said, “And you love
me, then, very much?”

“Madly; madly enough to die from it, whether you drive me from you, or
whether you listen to me still.”

“It is a hopeless case,” she said, in a playful manner; “a case which
must be treated with soothing application. Give me your hand. It is as
cold as ice.” De Guiche knelt down, and pressed to his lips, not one,
but both of Madame’s hands.

“Love me, then,” said the princess, “since it cannot be otherwise.” And
almost imperceptibly she pressed his fingers, raising him thus, partly
in the manner of a queen, and partly as a fond and affectionate woman
would have done. De Guiche trembled from head to foot, and Madame, who
felt how passion coursed through every fiber of his being, knew that
he indeed loved truly. “Give me your arm, comte,” she said, “and let us
return.”

“Ah! Madame,” said the comte, trembling and bewildered; “you have
discovered a third way of killing me.”

“But, happily, it is the slowest way, is it not?” she replied, as she
led him towards the grove of trees they had so lately quitted.



Chapter XLVI. Aramis’s Correspondence.

When De Guiche’s affairs, which had been suddenly set to right without
his having been able to guess the cause of their improvement, assumed
the unexpected aspect we have seen, Raoul, in obedience to the request
of the princess, had withdrawn in order not to interrupt an explanation,
the results of which he was far from guessing; and he soon after joined
the ladies of honor who were walking about in the flower-gardens. During
this time, the Chevalier de Lorraine, who had returned to his own room,
read De Wardes’s latter with surprise, for it informed him by the hand
of his valet, of the sword-thrust received at Calais, and of all the
details of the adventure, and invited him to inform De Guiche and
Monsieur, whatever there might be in the affair likely to be most
disagreeable to both of them. De Wardes particularly endeavored to prove
to the chevalier the violence of Madame’s affection for Buckingham, and
he finished his letter by declaring that he thought this feeling was
returned. The chevalier shrugged his shoulders at the last paragraph,
and, in fact, De Wardes was out of date, as we have seen. De Wardes was
still only at Buckingham’s affair. The chevalier threw the letter over
his shoulder upon an adjoining table, and said in a disdainful tone,
“It is really incredible; and yet poor De Wardes is not deficient in
ability; but the truth is, it is not very apparent, so easy is it to
grow rusty in the country. The deuce take the simpleton, who ought to
have written to me about matters of importance, and yet he writes such
silly stuff as that. If it had not been for that miserable letter, which
has no meaning at all in it, I should have detected in the grove yonder
a charming little intrigue, which would have compromised a woman, would
have perhaps have been as good as a sword-thrust for a man, and have
diverted Monsieur for many days to come.”

He looked at his watch. “It is now too late,” he said. “One o’clock
in the morning; every one must have returned to the king’s apartments,
where the night is to be finished; well, the scent is lost, and unless
some extraordinary chance--” And thus saying, as if to appeal to his
good star, the chevalier, greatly out of temper, approached the
window, which looked out upon a somewhat solitary part of the garden.
Immediately, and as if some evil genius was at his orders, he perceived
returning towards the chateau, accompanied by a man, a silk mantle of
a dark color, and recognized the figure which had struck his attention
half an hour previously.

“Admirable!” he thought, striking his hands together, “this is my
providential mysterious affair.” And he started out precipitately, along
the staircase, hoping to reach the courtyard in time to recognize the
woman in the mantle, and her companion. But as he arrived at the door of
the little court, he nearly knocked against Madame, whose radiant face
seemed full of charming revelations beneath the mantle which protected
without concealing her. Unfortunately, Madame was alone. The chevalier
knew that since he had seen her, not five minutes before, with a
gentleman, the gentleman in question could not be far off. Consequently,
he hardly took time to salute the princess as he drew up to allow her
to pass; then when she had advanced a few steps, with the rapidity of a
woman who fears recognition, and when the chevalier perceived that she
was too much occupied with her own thoughts to trouble herself about
him, he darted into the garden, looked hastily round on every side, and
embraced within his glance as much of the horizon as he possibly could.
He was just in time; the gentleman who had accompanied Madame was still
in sight; only he was hurrying towards one of the wings of the chateau,
behind which he was on the point of disappearing. There was not an
instant to lose; the chevalier darted in pursuit of him, prepared to
slacken his pace as he approached the unknown; but in spite of the
diligence he used, the unknown had disappeared behind the flight of
steps before he approached.

It was evident, however, that as the man pursued was walking quietly, in
a pensive manner, with his head bent down, either beneath the weight of
grief or happiness, when once the angle was passed, unless, indeed, he
were to enter by some door or another, the chevalier could not fail to
overtake him. And this, certainly, would have happened, if, at the
very moment he turned the angle, the chevalier had not run against two
persons, who were themselves wheeling in the opposite direction.
The chevalier was ready to seek a quarrel with these two troublesome
intruders, when, looking up, he recognized the superintendent. Fouquet
was accompanied by a person whom the chevalier now saw for the first
time. This stranger was the bishop of Vannes. Checked by the important
character of the individual, and obliged out of politeness to make his
own excuses when he expected to receive them, the chevalier stepped back
a few paces; and as Monsieur Fouquet possessed, if not the friendship,
at least the respect of every one; as the king himself, although he was
rather his enemy than his friend, treated M. Fouquet as a man of great
consideration, the chevalier did what the king himself would have done,
namely, he bowed to M. Fouquet, who returned his salutation with kindly
politeness, perceiving that the gentleman had run against him by mistake
and without any intention of being rude. Then, almost immediately
afterwards, having recognized the Chevalier de Lorraine, he made a few
civil remarks, to which the chevalier was obliged to reply. Brief as the
conversation was, De Lorraine saw, with the most unfeigned displeasure,
the figure of his unknown becoming dimmer in the distance, and fast
disappearing in the darkness. The chevalier resigned himself, and,
once resigned, gave his entire attention to Fouquet:--“You arrive late,
monsieur,” he said. “Your absence has occasioned great surprise, and
I heard Monsieur express himself as much astonished that, having been
invited by the king, you had not come.”

“It was impossible for me to do so; but I came as soon as I was free.”

“Is Paris quiet?”

“Perfectly so. Paris has received the last tax very well.”

“Ah! I understand you wished to assure yourself of this good feeling
before you came to participate in our _fetes_.”

“I have arrived, however, somewhat late to enjoy them. I will ask you,
therefore, to inform me if the king is in the chateau or not, if I am
likely to be able to see him this evening, or if I shall have to wait
until to-morrow.”

“We have lost sight of his majesty during the last half-hour nearly,”
 said the chevalier.

“Perhaps he is in Madame’s apartments?” inquired Fouquet.

“Not in Madame’s apartments, I should think, for I just now met Madame
as she was entering by the small staircase; and unless the gentleman
whom you a moment ago encountered was the king himself--” and the
chevalier paused, hoping that, in this manner, he might learn who it
was he had been hurrying after. But Fouquet, whether he had or had not
recognized De Guiche, simply replied, “No, monsieur, it was not the
king.”

The chevalier, disappointed in his expectation, saluted them; but as he
did so, casting a parting glance around him, and perceiving M. Colbert
in the center of a group, he said to the superintendent: “Stay,
monsieur; there is some one under the trees yonder, who will be able to
inform you better than myself.”

“Who?” asked Fouquet, whose near-sightedness prevented him from seeing
through the darkness.

“M. Colbert,” returned the chevalier.

“Indeed! That person, then, who is speaking yonder to those men with
torches in their hands, is M. Colbert?”

“M. Colbert himself. He is giving orders personally to the workmen who
are arranging the lamps for the illuminations.”

“Thank you,” said Fouquet, with an inclination of the head, which
indicated that he had obtained all the information he wished. The
chevalier, on his side, having, on the contrary, learned nothing at all,
withdrew with a profound salutation.

He had scarcely left when Fouquet, knitting his brows, fell into a deep
reverie. Aramis looked at him for a moment with a mingled feeling of
compassion and silence.

“What!” he said to him, “the fellow’s name alone seemed to affect you.
Is it possible that, full of triumph and delight as you were just now,
the sight merely of that man is capable of dispiriting you? Tell me,
have you faith in your good star?”

“No,” replied Fouquet, dejectedly.

“Why not?”

“Because I am too full of happiness at this present moment,” he replied,
in a trembling voice. “You, my dear D’Herblay, who are so learned, will
remember the history of a certain tyrant of Samos. What can I throw into
the sea to avert approaching evil? Yes! I repeat it once more, I am
too full of happiness! so happy that I wish for nothing beyond what I
have... I have risen so high... You know my motto: ‘_Quo non ascendam?_’
I have risen so high that nothing is left me but to descend from my
elevation. I cannot believe in the progress of a success already more
than human.”

Aramis smiled as he fixed his kind and penetrating glance upon him.
“If I were aware of the cause of your happiness,” he said, “I should
probably fear for your grace; but you regard me in the light of a true
friend; I mean, you turn to me in misfortune, nothing more. Even that
is an immense and precious boon, I know; but the truth is, I have a
just right to beg you to confide in me, from time to time, any fortunate
circumstances that befall you, in which I should rejoice, you know, more
than if they had befallen myself.”

“My dear prelate,” said Fouquet, laughing, “my secrets are of too
profane a character to confide them to a bishop, however great a
worldling he may be.”

“Bah! in confession.”

“Oh! I should blush too much if you were my confessor.” And Fouquet
began to sigh. Aramis again looked at him without further betrayal of
his thoughts than a placid smile.

“Well,” he said, “discretion is a great virtue.”

“Silence,” said Fouquet; “yonder venomous reptile has recognized us, and
is crawling this way.”

“Colbert?”

“Yes; leave me, D’Herblay; I do not wish that fellow to see you with me,
or he will take an aversion to _you_.”

Aramis pressed his hand, saying, “What need have I of his friendship,
while you are here?”

“Yes, but I may not always be here,” replied Fouquet, dejectedly.

“On that day, then, if that day should ever dawn,” said Aramis,
tranquilly, “we will think over a means of dispensing with the
friendship, or of braving the dislike of M. Colbert. But tell me, my
dear Fouquet, instead of conversing with this reptile, as you did him
the honor of styling him, a conversation the need for which I do not
perceive, why do you not pay a visit, if not to the king, at least to
Madame?”

“To Madame,” said the superintendent, his mind occupied by his
_souvenirs_. “Yes, certainly, to Madame.”

“You remember,” continued Aramis, “that we have been told that Madame
stands high in favor during the last two or three days. It enters into
your policy, and forms part of our plans, that you should assiduously
devote yourself to his majesty’s friends. It is a means of counteracting
the growing influence of M. Colbert. Present yourself, therefore, as
soon as possible to Madame, and, for our sakes, treat this ally with
consideration.”

“But,” said Fouquet, “are you quite sure that it is upon her that the
king has his eyes fixed at the present moment?”

“If the needle has turned, it must be since the morning. You know I have
my police.”

“Very well! I will go there at once, and, at all events, I shall have
a means of introduction in the shape of a magnificent pair of antique
cameos set with diamonds.”

“I have seen them, and nothing could be more costly and regal.”

At this moment they were interrupted by a servant followed by a courier.
“For you, monseigneur,” said the courier aloud, presenting a letter to
Fouquet.

“For your grace,” said the lackey in a low tone, handing Aramis a
letter. And as the lackey carried a torch in his hand, he placed himself
between the superintendent and the bishop of Vannes, so that both of
them could read at the same time. As Fouquet looked at the fine and
delicate writing on the envelope, he started with delight. Those who
love, or who are beloved, will understand his anxiety in the first
place, and his happiness in the next. He hastily tore open the letter,
which, however, contained only these words: “It is but an hour since
I quitted you, it is an age since I told you how much I love you.” And
that was all. Madame de Belliere had, in fact, left Fouquet about an
hour previously, after having passed two days with him; and apprehensive
lest his remembrance of her might be effaced for too long a period from
the heart she regretted, she dispatched a courier to him as the bearer
of this important communication. Fouquet kissed the letter, and rewarded
the bearer with a handful of gold. As for Aramis, he, on his side, was
engaged in reading, but with more coolness and reflection, the following
letter:

“The king has this evening been struck with a strange fancy; a woman
loves him. He learned it accidentally, as he was listening to the
conversation of this young girl with her companions; and his majesty
has entirely abandoned himself to his new caprice. The girl’s name is
Mademoiselle de la Valliere, and she is sufficiently pretty to warrant
this caprice becoming a strong attachment. Beware of Mademoiselle de la
Valliere.”

There was not a word about Madame. Aramis slowly folded the letter and
put it in his pocket. Fouquet was still delightedly inhaling the perfume
of his epistle.

“Monseigneur,” said Aramis, touching Fouquet’s arm.

“Yes, what is it?” he asked.

“An idea has just occurred to me. Are you acquainted with a young girl
of the name of La Valliere?

“Not at all.”

“Reflect a little.”

“Ah! yes, I believe so; one of Madame’s maids of honor.”

“That must be the one.”

“Well, what then?”

“Well, monseigneur, it is to that young girl that you must pay your
visit this evening.”

“Bah! why so?”

“Nay, more than that, it is to her you must present your cameos.”

“Nonsense.”

“You know, monseigneur, that my advice is not to be regarded lightly.”

“But this is unforeseen--”

“That is my affair. Pay your court in due form, and without loss of
time, to Mademoiselle de la Valliere. I will be your guarantee with
Madame de Belliere that your devotion is altogether politic.”

“What do you mean, my dear D’Herblay, and whose name have you just
pronounced?”

“A name which ought to convince you that, as I am so well informed about
yourself, I may possibly be just as well informed about others. Pay your
court, therefore, to La Valliere.”

“I will pay my court to whomsoever you like,” replied Fouquet, his heart
filled with happiness.

“Come, come, descend again to the earth, traveler in the seventh
heaven,” said Aramis; “M. Colbert is approaching. He has been
recruiting while we were reading; see, how he is surrounded, praised,
congratulated; he is decidedly becoming powerful.” In fact, Colbert was
advancing, escorted by all the courtiers who remained in the gardens,
every one of whom complimented him upon the arrangements of the _fete_:
all of which so puffed him up that he could hardly contain himself.

“If La Fontaine were here,” said Fouquet, smiling, “what an admirable
opportunity for him to recite his fable of ‘The Frog that wanted to make
itself as big as the Ox.’”

Colbert arrived in the center of the circle blazing with light; Fouquet
awaited his approach, unmoved and with a slightly mocking smile. Colbert
smiled too; he had been observing his enemy during the last quarter of
an hour, and had been approaching him gradually. Colbert’s smile was a
presage of hostility.

“Oh, oh!” said Aramis, in a low tone of voice to the superintendent;
“the scoundrel is going to ask you again for more millions to pay for
his fireworks and his colored lamps.” Colbert was the first to salute
them, and with an air which he endeavored to render respectful. Fouquet
hardly moved his head.

“Well, monseigneur, what do your eyes say? Have we shown our good
taste?”

“Perfect taste,” replied Fouquet, without permitting the slightest tone
of raillery to be remarked in his words.

“Oh!” said Colbert, maliciously, “you are treating us with indulgence.
We are poor, we servants of the king, and Fontainebleau is no way to be
compared as a residence with Vaux.”

“Quite true,” replied Fouquet coolly.

“But what can we do, monseigneur?” continued Colbert, “we have done our
best on slender resources.”

Fouquet made a gesture of assent.

“But,” pursued Colbert, “it would be only a proper display of your
magnificence, monseigneur, if you were to offer to his majesty a _fete_
in your wonderful gardens--in those gardens which have cost you sixty
millions of francs.”

“Seventy-two,” said Fouquet.

“An additional reason,” returned Colbert; “it would, indeed, be truly
magnificent.”

“But do you suppose, monsieur, that his majesty would deign to accept my
invitation?”

“I have no doubt whatever of it,” cried Colbert, hastily; “I will
guarantee that he does.”

“You are exceedingly kind,” said Fouquet. “I may depend on it, then?”

“Yes, monseigneur; yes, certainly.”

“Then I will consider the matter,” yawned Fouquet.

“Accept, accept,” whispered Aramis, eagerly.

“You will consider?” repeated Colbert.

“Yes,” replied Fouquet; “in order to know what day I shall submit my
invitation to the king.”

“This very evening, monseigneur, this very evening.”

“Agreed,” said the superintendent. “Gentlemen, I should wish to issue
my invitations; but you know that wherever the king goes, the king is
in his own palace; it is by his majesty, therefore, that you must be
invited.” A murmur of delight immediately arose. Fouquet bowed and left.

“Proud and dauntless man,” thought Colbert, “you accept, and yet you
know it will cost you ten millions.”

“You have ruined me,” whispered Fouquet, in a low tone, to Aramis.

“I have saved you,” replied the latter, whilst Fouquet ascended the
flight of steps and inquired whether the king was still visible.



Chapter XLVII. The Orderly Clerk.

The king, anxious to be again quite alone, in order to reflect well
upon what was passing in his heart, had withdrawn to his own apartments,
where M. de Saint-Aignan had, after his conversation with Madame, gone
to meet him. This conversation has already been related. The favorite,
vain of his twofold importance, and feeling that he had become, during
the last two hours, the confidant of the king, began to treat the
affairs of the court in a somewhat indifferent manner: and, from the
position in which he had placed himself, or rather, where chance had
placed him, he saw nothing but love and garlands of flowers around him.
The king’s love for Madame, that of Madame for the king, that of Guiche
for Madame, that of La Valliere for the king, that of Malicorne for
Montalais, that of Mademoiselle de Tonnay-Charente for himself, was
not all this, truly, more than enough to turn the head of any courtier?
Besides, Saint-Aignan was the model of courtiers, past, present, and to
come; and, moreover, showed himself such an excellent narrator, and
so discerningly appreciative that the king listened to him with an
appearance of great interest, particularly when he described the excited
manner with which Madame had sought for him to converse about the affair
of Mademoiselle de la Valliere. While the king no longer experienced for
Madame any remains of the passion he had once felt for her, there was,
in this same eagerness of Madame to procure information about him, great
gratification for his vanity, from which he could not free himself. He
experienced this pleasure then, but nothing more, and his heart was not,
for a single moment, alarmed at what Madame might, or might not, think
of his adventure. When, however, Saint-Aignan had finished, the king,
while preparing to retire to rest, asked, “Now, Saint-Aignan, you know
what Mademoiselle de la Valliere is, do you not?”

“Not only what she is, but what she will be.”

“What do you mean?”

“I mean that she is everything that woman can wish to be--that is to
say, beloved by your majesty; I mean, that she will be everything your
majesty may wish her to be.”

“That is not what I am asking. I do not wish to know what she is to-day,
or what she will be to-morrow; as you have remarked, that is my affair.
But tell me what others say of her.”

“They say she is well conducted.”

“Oh!” said the king, smiling, “that is mere report.”

“But rare enough, at court, sire, to believe when it is spread.”

“Perhaps you are right. Is she well born?”

“Excellently; the daughter of the Marquis de la Valliere, and
step-daughter of that good M. de Saint-Remy.”

“Ah, yes! my aunt’s major-domo; I remember; and I remember now that I
saw her as I passed through Blois. She was presented to the queens. I
have even to reproach myself that I did not on that occasion pay her the
attention she deserved.”

“Oh, sire! I trust that your majesty will now repair time lost.”

“And the report--you tell me--is, that Mademoiselle de la Valliere never
had a lover.”

“In any case, I do not think your majesty would be much alarmed at the
rivalry.”

“Yet, stay,” said the king, in a very serious tone of voice.

“Your majesty?”

“I remember.”

“Ah!”

“If she has no lover, she has, at least, a betrothed.”

“A betrothed!”

“What! Count, do you not know that?”

“No.”

“You, the man who knows all the news?”

“Your majesty will excuse me. You know this betrothed, then?”

“Assuredly! his father came to ask me to sign the marriage contract: it
is--” The king was about to pronounce the Vicomte de Bragelonne’s name,
when he stopped, and knitted his brows.

“It is--” repeated Saint-Aignan, inquiringly.

“I don’t remember now,” replied Louis XIV., endeavoring to conceal an
annoyance he had some trouble to disguise.

“Can I put your majesty in the way?” inquired the Comte de Saint-Aignan.

“No; for I no longer remember to whom I intended to refer; indeed, I
only remember very indistinctly, that one of the maids of honor was to
marry--the name, however, has escaped me.”

“Was it Mademoiselle de Tonnay-Charente he was going to marry?” inquired
Saint-Aignan.

“Very likely,” said the king.

“In that case, the intended was M. de Montespan; but Mademoiselle de
Tonnay-Charente did not speak of it, it seemed to me, in such a manner
as would frighten suitors away.”

“At all events,” said the king, “I know nothing, or almost nothing,
about Mademoiselle de la Valliere. Saint-Aignan, I rely upon you to
procure me every information about her.”

“Yes, sire, and when shall I have the honor of seeing your majesty
again, to give you the latest news?”

“Whenever you have procured it.”

“I shall obtain it speedily, then, if the information can be as quickly
obtained as my wish to see your majesty again.”

“Well said, count! By the by, has Madame displayed any ill-feeling
against this poor girl?”

“None, sire.”

“Madame did not get angry, then?”

“I do not know; I only know that she laughed continually.”

“That’s well; but I think I hear voices in the ante-rooms--no doubt a
courier has just arrived. Inquire, Saint-Aignan.” The count ran to the
door and exchanged a few words with the usher; he returned to the king,
saying, “Sire, it is M. Fouquet who has this moment arrived, by your
majesty’s orders, he says. He presented himself, but, because of the
lateness of the hour, he does not press for an audience this evening,
and is satisfied to have his presence here formally announced.”

“M. Fouquet! I wrote to him at three o’clock, inviting him to be at
Fontainebleau the following day, and he arrives at Fontainebleau at
two o’clock in the morning! This is, indeed, zeal!” exclaimed the
king, delighted to see himself so promptly obeyed. “On the contrary, M.
Fouquet shall have his audience. I summoned him, and will receive him.
Let him be introduced. As for you, count, pursue your inquiries, and be
here to-morrow.”

The king placed his finger on his lips; and Saint-Aignan, his heart
brimful of happiness, hastily withdrew, telling the usher to introduce
M. Fouquet, who, thereupon, entered the king’s apartment. Louis rose to
receive him.

“Good evening, M. Fouquet,” he said, smiling graciously; “I congratulate
you on your punctuality; and yet my message must have reached you late?”

“At nine in the evening, sire.”

“You have been working very hard lately, M. Fouquet, for I have been
informed that you have not left your rooms at Saint-Mande during the
last three or four days.”

“It is perfectly true, your majesty, that I have kept myself shut up for
the past three days,” replied Fouquet.

“Do you know, M. Fouquet, that I had a great many things to say to you?”
 continued the king, with a most gracious air.

“Your majesty overwhelms me, and since you are so graciously disposed
towards me, will you permit me to remind you of the promise made to
grant an audience?”

“Ah, yes! some church dignitary, who thinks he has to thank me for
something, is it not?”

“Precisely so, sire. The hour is, perhaps, badly chosen; but the time
of the companion whom I have brought with me is valuable, and as
Fontainebleau is on the way to his diocese--”

“Who is it, then?”

“The bishop of Vannes, whose appointment your majesty, at my
recommendation, deigned, three months since, to sign.”

“That is very possible,” said the king, who had signed without reading;
“and he is here?”

“Yes, sire; Vannes is an important diocese; the flock belonging to this
pastor needed his religious consolation; they are savages, whom it is
necessary to polish, at the same time that he instructs them, and M.
d’Herblay is unequalled in such kind of missions.”

“M. d’Herblay!” said the king, musingly, as if his name, heard long
since, was not, however, unknown to him.

“Oh!” said Fouquet, promptly, “your majesty is not acquainted with the
obscure name of one of your most faithful and valuable servants?”

“No, I confess I am not. And so he wishes to set off again?”

“He has this very day received letters which will, perhaps, compel him
to leave, so that, before setting off for that unknown region called
Bretagne, he is desirous of paying his respects to your majesty.”

“Is he waiting?”

“He is here, sire.”

“Let him enter.”

Fouquet made a sign to the usher in attendance, who was waiting behind
the tapestry. The door opened, and Aramis entered. The king allowed him
to finish the compliments which he addressed to him, and fixed a long
look upon a countenance which no one could forget, after having once
beheld it.

“Vannes!” he said: “you are bishop of Vannes, I believe?”

“Yes, sire.”

“Vannes is in Bretagne, I think?” Aramis bowed.

“Near the coast?” Aramis again bowed.

“A few leagues from Bell-Isle, is it not?”

“Yes, sire,” replied Aramis; “six leagues, I believe.”

“Six leagues; a mere step, then,” said Louis XIV.

“Not for us poor Bretons, sire,” replied Aramis: “six leagues, on the
contrary, is a great distance, if it be six leagues on land; and an
immense distance, if it be leagues on the sea. Besides, I have the honor
to mention to your majesty that there are six leagues of sea from the
river to Belle-Isle.”

“It is said that M. Fouquet has a very beautiful house there?” inquired
the king.

“Yes, it is said so,” replied Aramis, looking quietly at Fouquet.

“What do you mean by ‘it is said so?’” exclaimed the king.

“He has, sire.”

“Really, M. Fouquet, I must confess that one circumstance surprises me.”

“What may that be, sire?”

“That you should have at the head of the diocese a man like M.
d’Herblay, and yet should not have shown him Belle-Isle.”

“Oh, sire,” replied the bishop, without giving Fouquet time to answer,
“we poor Breton prelates seldom leave our residences.”

“M. de Vannes,” said the king, “I will punish M. Fouquet for his
indifference.”

“In what way, sire?”

“I will change your bishopric.”

Fouquet bit his lips, but Aramis only smiled.

“What income does Vannes bring you in?” continued the king.

“Sixty thousand livres, sire,” said Aramis.

“So trifling an amount as that; but you possess other property, Monsieur
de Vannes?”

“I have nothing else, sire; only M. Fouquet pays me one thousand two
hundred livres a year for his pew in the church.”

“Well, M. d’Herblay, I promise you something better than that.”

“Sire--”

“I will not forget you.”

Aramis bowed, and the king also bowed to him in a respectful manner, as
he was accustomed to do towards women and members of the Church. Aramis
gathered that his audience was at an end; he took his leave of the
king in the simple, unpretending language of a country pastor, and
disappeared.

“He is, indeed, a remarkable face,” said the king, following him with
his eyes as long as he could see him, and even to a certain degree when
he was no longer to be seen.

“Sire,” replied Fouquet, “if that bishop had been educated early in
life, no prelate in the kingdom would deserve the highest distinctions
better than he.”

“His learning is not extensive, then?”

“He changed the sword for the crucifix, and that rather late in life.
But it matters little, if your majesty will permit me to speak of M. de
Vannes again on another occasion--”

“I beg you to do so. But before speaking of him, let us speak of
yourself, M. Fouquet.”

“Of me, sire?”

“Yes, I have to pay you a thousand compliments.”

“I cannot express to your majesty the delight with which you overwhelm
me.”

“I understand you, M. Fouquet. I confess, however, to have had certain
prejudices against you.”

“In that case, I was indeed unhappy, sire.”

“But they exist no longer. Did you not perceive--”

“I did, indeed, sire; but I awaited with resignation the day when the
truth would prevail; and it seems that that day has now arrived.”

“Ah! you knew, then, you were in disgrace with me?”

“Alas! sire, I perceived it.”

“And do you know the reason?”

“Perfectly well; your majesty thought that I had been wastefully lavish
in expenditure.”

“Not so; far from that.”

“Or, rather an indifferent administrator. In a word, you thought
that, as the people had no money, there would be none for your majesty
either.”

“Yes, I thought so; but I was deceived.”

Fouquet bowed.

“And no disturbances, no complaints?”

“And money enough,” said Fouquet.

“The fact is that you have been profuse with it during the last month.”

“I have more, not only for all your majesty’s requirements, but for all
your caprices.”

“I thank you, Monsieur Fouquet,” replied the king, seriously. “I will
not put you to the proof. For the next two months I do not intend to ask
you for anything.”

“I will avail myself of the interval to amass five or six millions,
which will be serviceable as money in hand in case of war.”

“Five or six millions!”

“For the expenses of your majesty’s household only, be it understood.”

“You think war probable, M. Fouquet?”

“I think that if Heaven has bestowed on the eagle a beak and claws, it
is to enable him to show his royal character.”

The king blushed with pleasure.

“We have spent a great deal of money these few days past, Monsieur
Fouquet; will you not scold me for it?”

“Sire, your majesty has still twenty years of youth to enjoy, and a
thousand million francs to lavish in those twenty years.”

“That is a great deal of money, M. Fouquet,” said the king.

“I will economize, sire. Besides, your majesty as two valuable servants
in M. Colbert and myself. The one will encourage you to be prodigal with
your treasures--and this shall be myself, if my services should continue
to be agreeable to your majesty; and the other will economize money for
you, and this will be M. Colbert’s province.”

“M. Colbert?” returned the king, astonished.

“Certainly, sire; M. Colbert is an excellent accountant.”

At this commendation, bestowed by the traduced on the traducer, the king
felt himself penetrated with confidence and admiration. There was not,
moreover, either in Fouquet’s voice or look, anything which injuriously
affected a single syllable of the remark he had made; he did not pass
one eulogium, as it were, in order to acquire the right of making
two reproaches. The king comprehended him, and yielding to so much
generosity and address, he said, “You praise M. Colbert, then?”

“Yes, sire, I praise him; for, besides being a man of merit, I believe
him to be devoted to your majesty’s interests.”

“Is that because he has often interfered with your own views?” said the
king, smiling.

“Exactly, sire.”

“Explain yourself.”

“It is simple enough. I am the man who is needed to make the money come
in; he is the man who is needed to prevent it leaving.”

“Nay, nay, monsieur le surintendant, you will presently say something
which will correct this good opinion.”

“Do you mean as far as administrative abilities are concerned, sire?”

“Yes.”

“Not in the slightest.”

“Really?”

“Upon my honor, sire, I do not know throughout France a better clerk
than M. Colbert.”

This word “clerk” did not possess, in 1661, the somewhat subservient
signification attached to it in the present day; but, as spoken by
Fouquet, whom the king had addressed as the superintendent, it seemed
to acquire an insignificant and petty character, that at this juncture
served admirably to restore Fouquet to his place, and Colbert to his
own.

“And yet,” said Louis XIV., “it was Colbert, however, that,
notwithstanding his economy, had the arrangement of my _fetes_ here at
Fontainebleau; and I assure you, Monsieur Fouquet, that in no way has
he checked the expenditure of money.” Fouquet bowed, but did not reply.

“Is it not your opinion too?” said the king.

“I think, sire,” he replied, “that M. Colbert has done what he had to do
in an exceedingly orderly manner, and that he deserves, in this respect,
all the praise your majesty may bestow upon him.”

The word “orderly” was a proper accompaniment for the word “clerk.” The
king possessed that extreme sensitiveness of organization, that delicacy
of perception, which pierced through and detected the regular order of
feelings and sensations, before the actual sensations themselves, and
he therefore comprehended that the clerk had, in Fouquet’s opinion, been
too full of method and order in his arrangements; in other words, that
the magnificent _fetes_ of Fontainebleau might have been rendered more
magnificent still. The king consequently felt that there was something
in the amusements he had provided with which some person or another
might be able to find fault; he experienced a little of the annoyance
felt by a person coming from the provinces to Paris, dressed out in the
very best clothes which his wardrobe can furnish, only to find that
the fashionably dressed man there looks at him either too much or not
enough. This part of the conversation, which Fouquet had carried on with
so much moderation, yet with extreme tact, inspired the king with the
highest esteem for the character of the man and the capacity of the
minister. Fouquet took his leave at a quarter to three in the morning,
and the king went to bed a little uneasy and confused at the indirect
lesson he had received; and a good hour was employed by him in going
over again in memory the embroideries, the tapestries, the bills of fare
of the various banquets, the architecture of the triumphal arches, the
arrangements for the illuminations and fireworks, all the offspring
of the “Clerk Colbert’s” invention. The result was, the king passed in
review before him everything that had taken place during the last
eight days, and decided that faults could be found in his _fetes_.
But Fouquet, by his politeness, his thoughtful consideration, and his
generosity, had injured Colbert more deeply than the latter, by his
artifice, his ill-will, and his persevering hatred, had ever yet
succeeded in hurting Fouquet.



Chapter XLVIII. Fontainebleau at Two o’Clock in the Morning.

As we have seen, Saint-Aignan had quitted the king’s apartment at the
very moment the superintendent entered it. Saint-Aignan was charged with
a mission that required dispatch, and he was going to do his utmost to
turn his time to the best advantage. He whom we have introduced as the
king’s friend was indeed an uncommon personage; he was one of those
valuable courtiers whose vigilance and acuteness of perception threw
all other favorites into the shade, and counterbalanced, by his close
attention, the servility of Dangeau, who was not the favorite, but the
toady of the king. M. de Saint-Aignan began to think what was to be
done in the present position of affairs. He reflected that his first
information ought to come from De Guiche. He therefore set out in search
of him, but De Guiche, whom we saw disappear behind one of the wings,
and who seemed to have returned to his own apartments, had not entered
the chateau. Saint-Aignan therefore went in quest of him, and after
having turned, and twisted, and searched in every direction, he
perceived something like a human form leaning against a tree. This
figure was as motionless as a statue, and seemed deeply engaged in
looking at a window, although its curtains were closely drawn. As this
window happened to be Madame’s, Saint-Aignan concluded that the form in
question must be that of De Guiche. He advanced cautiously, and found
he was not mistaken. De Guiche had, after his conversation with Madame,
carried away such a weight of happiness, that all of his strength of
mind was hardly sufficient to enable him to support it. On his side,
Saint-Aignan knew that De Guiche had had something to do with La
Valliere’s introduction to Madame’s household, for a courtier knows
everything and forgets nothing; but he had never learned under what
title or conditions De Guiche had conferred his protection upon La
Valliere. But, as in asking a great many questions it is singular if a
man does not learn something, Saint-Aignan reckoned upon learning much
or little, as the case might be, if he questioned De Guiche with that
extreme tact, and, at the same time, with that persistence in attaining
an object, of which he was capable. Saint-Aignan’s plan was as follows:
If the information obtained was satisfactory, he would inform the king,
with alacrity, that he had lighted upon a pearl, and claim the privilege
of setting the pearl in question in the royal crown. If the information
were unsatisfactory,--which, after all, might be possible,--he would
examine how far the king cared about La Valliere, and make use of his
information in such a manner as to get rid of the girl altogether, and
thereby obtain all the merit of her banishment with all the ladies of
the court who might have the least pretensions to the king’s heart,
beginning with Madame and finishing with the queen. In case the king
should show himself obstinate in his fancy, then he would not produce
the damaging information he had obtained, but would let La Valliere
know that this damaging information was carefully preserved in a secret
drawer of her confidant’s memory. In this manner, he would be able
to air his generosity before the poor girl’s eyes, and so keep her in
constant suspense between gratitude and apprehension, to such an extent
as to make her a friend at court, interested, as an accomplice, in
trying to make his fortune, while she was making her own. As far as
concerned the day when the bombshell of the past should burst, if ever
there were any occasion, Saint-Aignan promised himself that he would
by that time have taken all possible precautions, and would pretend an
entire ignorance of the matter to the king; while, with regard to La
Valliere, he would still have an opportunity of being considered the
personification of generosity. It was with such ideas as these, which
the fire of covetousness had caused to dawn in half an hour, that
Saint-Aignan, the son of earth, as La Fontaine would have said,
determined to get De Guiche into conversation: in other words, to
trouble him in his happiness--a happiness of which Saint-Aignan was
quite ignorant. It was long past one o’clock in the morning when
Saint-Aignan perceived De Guiche, standing, motionless, leaning
against the trunk of a tree, with his eyes fastened upon the lighted
window,--the sleepiest hour of night-time, which painters crown with
myrtles and budding poppies, the hour when eyes are heavy, hearts throb,
and heads feel dull and languid--an hour which casts upon the day which
has passed away a look of regret, while addressing a loving greeting
to the dawning light. For De Guiche it was the dawn of unutterable
happiness; he would have bestowed a treasure upon a beggar, had one
stood before him, to secure him uninterrupted indulgence in his
dreams. It was precisely at this hour that Saint-Aignan, badly
advised,--selfishness always counsels badly,--came and struck him on the
shoulder, at the very moment he was murmuring a word, or rather a name.

“Ah!” he cried loudly, “I was looking for you.”

“For me?” said De Guiche, starting.

“Yes; and I find you seemingly moon-struck. Is it likely, my dear comte,
you have been attacked by a poetical malady, and are making verses?”

The young man forced a smile upon his lips, while a thousand conflicting
sensations were muttering defiance of Saint-Aignan in the deep recesses
of his heart. “Perhaps,” he said. “But by what happy chance--”

“Ah! your remark shows that you did not hear what I said.”

“How so?”

“Why, I began by telling you I was looking for you.”

“You were looking for me?”

“Yes: and I find you now in the very act.”

“Of doing what, I should like to know?”

“Of singing the praises of Phyllis.”

“Well, I do not deny it,” said De Guiche, laughing. “Yes, my dear comte,
I was celebrating Phyllis’s praises.”

“And you have acquired the right to do so.”

“I?”

“You; no doubt of it. You; the intrepid protector of every beautiful and
clever woman.”

“In the name of goodness, what story have you got hold of now?”

“Acknowledged truths, I am well aware. But stay a moment; I am in love.”

“You?”

“Yes.”

“So much the better, my dear comte; tell me all about it.” And De
Guiche, afraid that Saint-Aignan might perhaps presently observe the
window, where the light was still burning, took the comte’s arm and
endeavored to lead him away.

“Oh!” said the latter, resisting, “do not take me towards those dark
woods, it is too damp there. Let us stay in the moonlight.” And while
he yielded to the pressure of De Guiche’s arm, he remained in the
flower-garden adjoining the chateau.

“Well,” said De Guiche, resigning himself, “lead me where you like, and
ask me what you please.”

“It is impossible to be more agreeable than you are.” And then, after
a moment’s silence, Saint-Aignan continued, “I wish you to tell me
something about a certain person in who you have interested yourself.”

“And with whom you are in love?”

“I will neither admit nor deny it. You understand that a man does not
very readily place his heart where there is no hope of return, and that
it is most essential he should take measures of security in advance.”

“You are right,” said De Guiche with a sigh; “a man’s heart is a very
precious gift.”

“Mine particularly is very tender, and in that light I present it to
you.”

“Oh! you are well known, comte. Well?”

“It is simply a question of Mademoiselle de Tonnay-Charente.”

“Why, my dear Saint-Aignan, you are losing your senses, I should think.”

“Why so?”

“I have never shown or taken any interest in Mademoiselle de
Tonnay-Charente.”

“Bah!”

“Never.”

“Did you not obtain admission for Mademoiselle de Tonnay-Charente into
Madame’s household?”

“Mademoiselle de Tonnay-Charente--and you ought to know it better than
any one else, my dear comte--is of a sufficiently good family to make
her presence here desirable, and her admittance very easy.”

“You are jesting.”

“No; and upon my honor I do not know what you mean.”

“And you had nothing, then, to do with her admission?”

“No.”

“You do not know her?”

“I saw her for the first time the day she was presented to Madame.
Therefore, as I have never taken any interest in her, as I do not know
her, I am not able to give you the information you require.” And De
Guiche made a movement as though he were about to leave his questioner.

“Nay, nay, one moment, my dear comte,” said Saint-Aignan; “you shall not
escape me in this manner.”

“Why, really, it seems to me that it is now time to return to our
apartments.”

“And yet you were not going in when I--did not meet, but found you.”

“Therefore, my dear comte,” said De Guiche, “as long as you have
anything to say to me, I place myself entirely at your service.”

“And you are quite right in doing so. What matters half an hour more or
less? Will you swear that you have no injurious communications to
make to me about her, and that any injurious communications you might
possibly have to make are not the cause of your silence?”

“Oh! I believe the poor child to be as pure as crystal.”

“You overwhelm me with joy. And yet I do not wish to have towards you
the appearance of a man so badly informed as I seem. It is quite certain
that you supplied the princess’s household with the ladies of honor.
Nay, a song has even been written about it.”

“Oh! songs are written about everything.”

“Do you know it?”

“No: sing it to me and I shall make its acquaintance.”

“I cannot tell you how it begins; I only remember how it ends.”

“Very well, at all events, that is something.”

“When Maids of Honor happen to run short, Lo!--Guiche will furnish the
entire Court.”

“The idea is weak, and the rhyme poor,” said De Guiche.

“What can you expect, my dear fellow? it is not Racine’s or Moliere’s,
but La Feuillade’s; and a great lord cannot rhyme like a beggarly poet.”

“It is very unfortunate, though, that you only remember the
termination.”

“Stay, stay, I have just recollected the beginning of the second
couplet.”

“Why, there’s the birdcage, with a pretty pair, The charming Montalais,
and...”

“And La Valliere,” exclaimed Guiche, impatiently, and completely
ignorant besides of Saint-Aignan’s object.

“Yes, yes, you have it. You have hit upon the word, ‘La Valliere.’”

“A grand discovery indeed.”

“Montalais and La Valliere, these, then, are the two young girls in whom
you interest yourself,” said Saint-Aignan, laughing.

“And so Mademoiselle de Tonnay-Charente’s name is not to be met with in
the song?”

“No, indeed.”

“And are you satisfied, then?”

“Perfectly; but I find Montalais there,” said Saint-Aignan, still
laughing.

“Oh! you will find her everywhere. She is a singularly active young
lady.”

“You know her?”

“Indirectly. She was the _protegee_ of a man named Malicorne, who is a
_protegee_ of Manicamp’s; Manicamp asked me to get the situation of
maid of honor for Montalais in Madame’s household, and a situation for
Malicorne as an officer in Monsieur’s household. Well, I asked for the
appointments, for you know very well that I have a weakness for that
droll fellow Manicamp.”

“And you obtained what you sought?”

“For Montalais, yes; for Malicorne, yes and no; for as yet he is only on
trial. Do you wish to know anything else?”

“The last word of the couplet still remains, La Valliere,” said
Saint-Aignan, resuming the smile that so tormented Guiche.

“Well,” said the latter, “it is true that I obtained admission for her
in Madame’s household.”

“Ah!” said Saint-Aignan.

“But,” continued Guiche, assuming a great coldness of manner, “you will
oblige me, comte, not to jest about that name. Mademoiselle la Baume le
Blanc de la Valliere is a young lady perfectly well-conducted.”

“Perfectly well-conducted do you say?”

“Yes.”

“Then you have not heard the last rumor?” exclaimed Saint-Aignan.

“No, and you will do me a service, my dear comte, in keeping this report
to yourself and to those who circulate it.”

“Ah! bah! you take the matter up very seriously.”

“Yes; Mademoiselle de Valliere is beloved by one of my best friends.”

Saint-Aignan started. “Aha!” he said.

“Yes, comte,” continued Guiche; “and consequently, you, the most
distinguished man in France for polished courtesy of manner, will
understand that I cannot allow my friend to be placed in a ridiculous
position.”

Saint-Aignan began to bite his nails, partially from vexation, and
partially from disappointed curiosity. Guiche made him a very profound
bow.

“You send me away,” said Saint-Aignan, who was dying to know the name of
the friend.

“I do not send you away, my dear fellow. I am going to finish my lines
to Phyllis.”

“And those lines--”

“Are a _quatrain_. You understand, I trust, that a _quatrain_ is a
serious affair?”

“Of course.”

“And as, of these four lines, of which it is composed, I have yet three
and a half to make, I need my undivided attention.”

“I quite understand. Adieu! comte. By the by--”

“What?”

“Are you quick at making verses?”

“Wonderfully so.”

“Will you have quite finished the three lines and a half to-morrow
morning?”

“I _hope_ so.”

“Adieu, then, until to-morrow.”

“Adieu, adieu!”

Saint-Aignan was obliged to accept the notice to quit; he accordingly
did so, and disappeared behind the hedge. Their conversation had led
Guiche and Saint-Aignan a good distance from the chateau.

Every mathematician, every poet, and every dreamer has his own subjects
of interest. Saint-Aignan, on leaving Guiche, found himself at the
extremity of the grove,--at the very spot where the outbuildings of
the servants begin, and where, behind the thickets of acacias and
chestnut-trees interlacing their branches, which were hidden by masses
of clematis and young vines, the wall which separated the woods from
the courtyard was erected. Saint-Aignan, alone, took the path which led
towards these buildings; De Guiche going off in the opposite direction.
The one proceeded to the flower-garden, while the other bent his steps
towards the walls. Saint-Aignan walked on between rows of mountain-ash,
lilac, and hawthorn, which formed an almost impenetrable roof above his
head; his feet were buried in the soft gravel and thick moss. He was
deliberating a means of taking his revenge, which seemed difficult for
him to carry out, and was vexed with himself for not having learned
more about La Valliere, notwithstanding the ingenious measures he
had resorted to in order to acquire more information about her, when
suddenly the murmur of a human voice attracted his attention. He
heard whispers, the complaining tones of a woman’s voice mingled with
entreaties, smothered laughter, sighs, and half-stilted exclamations of
surprise; but above them all, the woman’s voice prevailed. Saint-Aignan
stopped to look about him; he perceived from the greatest surprise that
the voices proceeded, not from the ground, but from the branches of the
trees. As he glided along under the covered walk, he raised his head,
and observed at the top of the wall a woman perched upon a ladder, in
eager conversation with a man seated on a branch of a chestnut-tree,
whose head alone could be seen, the rest of his body being concealed in
the thick covert of the chestnut. [5]



Chapter XLIX. The Labyrinth.

Saint-Aignan, who had only been seeking for information, had met with an
adventure. This was indeed a piece of good luck. Curious to learn why,
and particularly what about, this man and woman were conversing at such
an hour, and in such a singular position, Saint-Aignan made himself as
small as he possibly could, and approached almost under the rounds
of the ladder. And taking measures to make himself as comfortable as
possible, he leaned his back against a tree and listened, and heard the
following conversation. The woman was the first to speak.

“Really, Monsieur Manicamp,” she said, in a voice which, notwithstanding
the reproaches she addressed to him, preserved a marked tone of
coquetry, “really your indiscretion is of a very dangerous character. We
cannot talk long in this manner without being observed.”

“That is very probable,” said the man, in the calmest and coolest of
tones.

“In that case, then, what would people say? Oh! if any one were to see
me, I declare I should die of very shame.”

“Oh! that would be very silly; I do not believe you would.”

“It might have been different if there had been anything between us; but
to injure myself gratuitously is really very foolish of me; so, adieu,
Monsieur Manicamp.”

“So far so good; I know the man, and now let me see who the woman is,”
 said Saint-Aignan, watching the rounds of the ladder, on which were
standing two pretty little feet covered with blue satin shoes.

“Nay, nay, for pity’s sake, my dear Montalais,” cried Manicamp, “deuce
take it, do not go away; I have a great many things to say to you, of
the greatest importance, still.”

“Montalais,” said Saint-Aignan to himself, “one of the three. Each of
the three gossips had her adventure, only I imagined the hero of this
one’s adventure was Malicorne and not Manicamp.”

At her companion’s appeal, Montalais stopped in the middle of her
descent, and Saint-Aignan could observe the unfortunate Manicamp climb
from one branch of the chestnut-tree to another, either to improve his
situation or to overcome the fatigue consequent upon his inconvenient
position.

“Now, listen to me,” said he; “you quite understand, I hope, that my
intentions are perfectly innocent?”

“Of course. But why did you write me a letter stimulating my gratitude
towards you? Why did you ask me for an interview at such an hour and in
such a place as this?”

“I stimulated your gratitude in reminding you that it was I who had been
the means of your becoming attached to Madame’s household; because most
anxiously desirous of obtaining the interview you have been kind enough
to grant me, I employed the means which appeared to me most certain to
insure it. And my reason for soliciting it, at such an hour and in such
a locality, was, that the hour seemed to me to be the most prudent, and
the locality the least open to observation. Moreover, I had occasion
to speak to you upon certain subjects which require both prudence and
solitude.”

“Monsieur Manicamp!”

“But everything I wish to say is perfectly honorable, I assure you.”

“I think, Monsieur Manicamp, it will be more becoming in me to take my
leave.”

“No, no!--listen to me, or I will jump from my perch here to yours;
and be careful how you set me at defiance, for a branch of this
chestnut-tree causes me a good deal of annoyance, and may provoke me to
extreme measures. Do not follow the example of this branch, then, but
listen to me.”

“I am listening, and I agree to do so; but be as brief as possible, for
if you have a branch of the chestnut-tree which annoys you, I wish you
to understand that one of the rounds of the ladder is hurting the soles
of my feet, and my shoes are being cut through.”

“Do me the kindness to give me your hand.”

“Why?”

“Will you have the goodness to do so?”

“There is my hand, then; but what are you going to do?”

“To draw you towards me.”

“What for? You surely do not wish me to join you in the tree?”

“No; but I wish you to sit down upon the wall; there, that will do;
there is quite room enough, and I would give a great deal to be allowed
to sit down beside you.”

“No, no; you are very well where you are; we should be seen.”

“Do you really think so?” said Manicamp, in an insinuating voice.

“I am sure of it.”

“Very well, I remain in my tree, then, although I cannot be worse
placed.”

“Monsieur Manicamp, we are wandering away from the subject.”

“You are right, we are so.”

“You wrote me a letter?”

“I did.”

“Why did you write?”

“Fancy, at two o’clock to-day, De Guiche left.”

“What then?”

“Seeing him set off, I followed him, as I usually do.”

“Of course, I see that, since you are here now.”

“Don’t be in a hurry. You are aware, I suppose, that De Guiche is up to
his very neck in disgrace?”

“Alas! yes.”

“It was the very height of imprudence on his part, then, to come to
Fontainebleau to seek those who had at Paris sent him away into exile,
and particularly those from whom he had been separated.”

“Monsieur Manicamp, you reason like Pythagoras.”

“Moreover, De Guiche is as obstinate as a man in love can be, and he
refused to listen to any of my remonstrances. I begged, I implored him,
but he would not listen to anything. Oh, the deuce!”

“What’s the matter?”

“I beg your pardon, Mademoiselle Montalais, but this confounded branch,
about which I have already had the honor of speaking to you, has just
torn a certain portion of my dress.”

“It is quite dark,” replied Montalais, laughing; “so, pray continue, M.
Manicamp.”

“De Guiche set off on horseback as hard as he could, I following him,
at a slower pace. You quite understand that to throw one’s self into
the water, for instance, with a friend, at the same headlong rate as he
himself would do it, would be the act either of a fool or a madman. I
therefore allowed De Guiche to get in advance, and I proceeded on my
way with a commendable slowness of pace, feeling quite sure that my
unfortunate friend would not be received, or, if he had been, that he
would ride off again at the very first cross, disagreeable answer;
and that I should see him returning much faster than he went, without
having, myself, gone much farther than Ris or Melun--and that even was a
good distance you will admit, for it is eleven leagues to get there and
as many to return.”

Montalais shrugged her shoulders.

“Laugh as much as you like; but if, instead of being comfortably seated
on the top of the wall as you are, you were sitting on this branch as if
you were on horseback, you would, like Augustus, aspire to descend.”

“Be patient, my dear M. Manicamp; a few minutes will soon pass away; you
were saying, I think, that you had gone beyond Ris and Melun.”

“Yes, I went through Ris and Melun, and I continued to go on, more
and more surprised that I did not see him returning; and here I am at
Fontainebleau; I look for and inquire after De Guiche everywhere, but
no one has seen him, no one in the town has spoken to him; he arrived
riding at full gallop, he entered the chateau; and there he has
disappeared. I have been here at Fontainebleau since eight o’clock this
evening inquiring for De Guiche in every direction, but no De Guiche
can be found. I am dying with uneasiness. You understand that I have not
been running my head into the lion’s den, in entering the chateau, as my
imprudent friend has done; I came at once to the servants’ offices, and
I succeeded in getting a letter conveyed to you; and now, for Heaven’s
sake, my dear young lady, relieve me from my anxiety.”

“There will be no difficulty in that, my dear M. Manicamp; your friend
De Guiche has been admirably received.”

“Bah!”

“The king made quite a fuss over him.”

“The king, who exiled him!”

“Madame smiled upon him, and Monsieur appears to like him better than
ever.”

“Ah! ah!” said Manicamp, “that explains to me, then, why and how he has
remained. And did he not say anything about me?”

“Not a word.”

“That is very unkind. What is he doing now?”

“In all probability he is asleep, or, if not asleep, dreaming.”

“And what have they been doing all the evening?”

“Dancing.”

“The famous ballet? How did De Guiche look?”

“Superb!”

“Dear fellow! And now, pray forgive me, Mademoiselle Montalais; but all
I now have to do is pass from where I now am to your apartment.”

“What do you mean?”

“I cannot suppose that the door of the chateau will be opened for me at
this hour; and as for spending the night upon this branch, I possibly
might not object to do so, but I declare it is impossible for any other
animal than a boa-constrictor to do it.”

“But, M. Manicamp, I cannot introduce a man over the wall in that
manner.”

“Two, if you please,” said a second voice, but in so timid a tone that
it seemed as if its owner felt the utter impropriety of such a request.

“Good gracious!” exclaimed Montalais, “who is that speaking to me?”

“Malicorne, Mademoiselle Montalais.”

And as Malicorne spoke, he raised himself from the ground to the lowest
branches, and thence to the height of the wall.

“Monsieur Malicorne! why, you are both mad!”

“How do you do, Mademoiselle Montalais?” inquired Malicorne.

“I needed but this!” said Montalais, in despair.

“Oh! Mademoiselle Montalais,” murmured Malicorne; “do not be so severe,
I beseech you.”

“In fact,” said Manicamp, “we are your friends, and you cannot possibly
wish your friends to lose their lives; and to leave us to pass the night
on these branches is in fact condemning us to death.”

“Oh!” said Montalais, “Monsieur Malicorne is so robust that a night
passed in the open air with the beautiful stars above him will not do
him any harm, and it will be a just punishment for the trick he has
played me.”

“Be it so, then; let Malicorne arrange matters with you in the best way
he can; I pass over,” said Manicamp. And bending down the famous branch
against which he had directed such bitter complaints, he succeeded, by
the assistance of his hands and feet, in seating himself side by side
with Montalais, who tried to push him back, while he endeavored to
maintain his position, and, moreover, he succeeded. Having taken
possession of the ladder, he stepped on it, and then gallantly offered
his hand to his fair antagonist. While this was going on, Malicorne had
installed himself in the chestnut-tree, in the very place Manicamp had
just left, determining within himself to succeed him in the one he now
occupied. Manicamp and Montalais descended a few rounds of the ladder,
Manicamp insisting, and Montalais laughing and objecting.

Suddenly Malicorne’s voice was heard in tones of entreaty:

“I entreat you, Mademoiselle Montalais, not to leave me here. My
position is very insecure, and some accident will be certain to befall
me, if I attempt unaided to reach the other side of the wall; it does
not matter if Manicamp tears his clothes, for he can make use of M. de
Guiche’s wardrobe; but I shall not be able to use even those belonging
to M. Manicamp, for they will be torn.”

“My opinion,” said Manicamp, without taking any notice of Malicorne’s
lamentations, “is that the best thing to be done is to go and look for
De Guiche without delay, for, by and by, perhaps, I may not be able to
get to his apartments.”

“That is my own opinion, too,” replied Montalais; “so, go at once,
Monsieur Manicamp.”

“A thousand thanks. Adieu Mademoiselle Montalais,” said Manicamp,
jumping to the ground; “your condescension cannot be repaid.”

“Farewell, M. Manicamp; I am now going to get rid of M. Malicorne.”

Malicorne sighed. Manicamp went away a few paces, but returning to the
foot of the ladder, he said, “By the by, how do I get to M. de Guiche’s
apartments?”

“Nothing easier. You go along by the hedge until you reach a place where
the paths cross.”

“Yes.”

“You will see four paths.”

“Exactly.”

“One of which you will take.”

“Which of them?”

“That to the right.”

“That to the right?”

“No, to the left.”

“The deuce!”

“No, no, wait a minute--”

“You do not seem to be quite sure. Think again, I beg.”

“You take the middle path.”

“But there are _four_.”

“So there are. All I know is, that one of the four paths leads straight
to Madame’s apartments; and that one I am well acquainted with.”

“But M. de Guiche is not in Madame’s apartments, I suppose?”

“No, indeed.”

“Well, then the path which leads to Madame’s apartments is of no use to
me, and I would willingly exchange it for the one that leads to where M.
de Guiche is lodging.”

“Of course, and I know that as well; but as for indicating it from where
we are, it is quite impossible.”

“Well, let us suppose that I have succeeded in finding that fortunate
path.”

“In that case, you are almost there, for you have nothing else to do but
cross the labyrinth.”

“_Nothing_ more than that? The deuce! so there is a labyrinth as well.”

“Yes, and complicated enough too; even in daylight one may sometimes
be deceived,--there are turnings and windings without end: in the first
place, you must turn three times to the right, then twice to the left,
then turn once--stay, is it once or twice, though? at all events, when
you get clear of the labyrinth, you will see an avenue of sycamores,
and this avenue leads straight to the pavilion in which M. de Guiche is
lodging.”

“Nothing could be more clearly indicated,” said Manicamp; “and I have
not the slightest doubt in the world that if I were to follow your
directions, I should lose my way immediately. I have, therefore, a
slight service to ask of you.”

“What may that be?”

“That you will offer me your arm and guide me yourself, like another--
like another--I used to know mythology, but other important matters have
made me forget it; pray come with me, then?”

“And am I to be abandoned, then?” cried Malicorne.

“It is quite impossible, monsieur,” said Montalais to Manicamp; “if I
were to be seen with you at such an hour, what would be said of me?”

“Your own conscience would acquit you,” said Manicamp, sententiously.

“Impossible, monsieur, impossible.”

“In that case, let me assist Malicorne to get down; he is a very
intelligent fellow, and possesses a very keen scent; he will guide me,
and if we lose ourselves, both of us will be lost, and the one will save
the other. If we are together, and should be met by any one, we shall
look as if we had some matter of business in hand; whilst alone I should
have the appearance either of a lover or a robber. Come, Malicorne, here
is the ladder.”

Malicorne had already stretched out one of his legs towards the top of
the wall, when Manicamp said, in a whisper, “Hush!”

“What’s the matter?” inquired Montalais.

“I hear footsteps.”

“Good heavens!”

In fact the fancied footsteps soon became a reality; the foliage was
pushed aside, and Saint-Aignan appeared, with a smile on his lips, and
his hand stretched out towards them, taking every one by surprise;
that is to say, Malicorne upon the tree with his head stretched out,
Montalais upon the round of the ladder and clinging to it tightly,
and Manicamp on the ground with his foot advanced ready to set off.
“Good-evening, Manicamp,” said the comte, “I am glad to see you, my dear
fellow; we missed you this evening, and a good many inquiries have been
made about you. Mademoiselle de Montalais, your most obedient servant.”

Montalais blushed. “Good heavens!” she exclaimed, hiding her face in
both her hands.

“Pray reassure yourself; I know how perfectly innocent you are, and I
shall give a good account of you. Manicamp, do you follow me: the hedge,
the cross-paths, and labyrinth, I am well acquainted with them all;
I will be your Ariadne. There now, your mythological name is found at
last.”

“Perfectly true, comte.”

“And take M. Malicorne away with you at the same time,” said Montalais.

“No, indeed,” said Malicorne; “M. Manicamp has conversed with you
as long as he liked, and now it is my turn, if you please; I have a
multitude of things to tell you about our future prospects.”

“You hear,” said the comte, laughing; “stay with him, Mademoiselle
Montalais. This is, indeed, a night for secrets.” And, taking Manicamp’s
arm, the comte led him rapidly away in the direction of the road
Montalais knew so well, and indicated so badly. Montalais followed them
with her eyes as long as she could perceive them.



Chapter L: How Malicorne Had Been Turned Out of the Hotel of the Beau
Paon.

While Montalais was engaged in looking after the comte and Manicamp,
Malicorne had taken advantage of the young girl’s attention being drawn
away to render his position somewhat more tolerable, and when she turned
round, she immediately noticed the change which had taken place; for
he had seated himself, like a monkey, upon the wall, the foliage of the
wild vine and honeysuckle curled around his head like a faun, while
the twisted ivy branches represented tolerably enough his cloven
feet. Montalais required nothing to make her resemblance to a dryad as
complete as possible. “Well,” she said, ascending another round of the
ladder, “are you resolved to render me unhappy? have you not persecuted
me enough, tyrant that you are?”

“I a tyrant?” said Malicorne.

“Yes, you are always compromising me, Monsieur Malicorne; you are a
perfect monster of wickedness.”

“I?”

“What have you to do with Fontainebleau? Is not Orleans your place of
residence?”

“Do you ask me what I have to do here? I wanted to see you.”

“Ah, great need of that.”

“Not as far as concerns yourself, perhaps, but as far as I am concerned,
Mademoiselle Montalais, you know very well that I have left my home, and
that, for the future, I have no other place of residence than that which
you may happen to have. As you, therefore, are staying at Fontainebleau
at the present moment, I have come to Fontainebleau.”

Montalais shrugged her shoulders. “You wished to see me, did you not?”
 she said.

“Of course.”

“Very well, you have seen me,--you are satisfied; so now go away.”

“Oh, no,” said Malicorne; “I came to talk with you as well as to see
you.”

“Very well, we will talk by and by, and in another place than this.”

“By and by! Heaven only knows if I shall meet you by and by in another
place. We shall never find a more favorable one than this.”

“But I cannot this evening, nor at the present moment.”

“Why not?”

“Because a thousand things have happened to-night.”

“Well, then, my affair will make a thousand and one.”

“No, no; Mademoiselle de Tonnay-Charente is waiting for me in our room
to communicate something of the very greatest importance.”

“How long has she been waiting?”

“For an hour at least.”

“In that case,” said Malicorne, tranquilly, “she can wait a few minutes
longer.”

“Monsieur Malicorne,” said Montalais, “you are forgetting yourself.”

“You should rather say that it is you who are forgetting me, and that I
am getting impatient at the part you make me play here indeed! For the
last week I have been prowling about among the company, and you have not
once deigned to notice my presence.”

“Have you been prowling about here for a week, M. Malicorne?”

“Like a wolf; sometimes I have been burnt by the fireworks, which
have singed two of my wigs; at others, I have been completely
drenched in the osiers by the evening damps, or the spray from the
fountains,--half-famished, fatigued to death, with the view of a wall
always before me, and the prospect of having to scale it perhaps. Upon
my word, this is not the sort of life for any one to lead who is
neither a squirrel, a salamander, nor an otter; and since you drive your
inhumanity so far as to wish to make me renounce my condition as a man,
I declare it openly. A man I am, indeed, and a man I will remain, unless
by superior orders.”

“Well, then, tell me, what do you wish,--what do you require,--what do
you insist upon?” said Montalais, in a submissive tone.

“Do you mean to tell me that you did not know I was at Fontainebleau?”

“I?”

“Nay, be frank.”

“I suspected so.”

“Well, then, could you not have contrived during the last week to have
seen me once a day, at least?”

“I have always been prevented, M. Malicorne.”

“Fiddlesticks!”

“Ask my companion, if you do not believe me.”

“I shall ask no one to explain matters, I know better than any one.”

“Compose yourself, M. Malicorne: things will change.”

“They must indeed.”

“You know that, whether I see you or not, I am thinking of you,” said
Montalais, in a coaxing tone of voice.

“Oh, you are thinking of me, are you? well, and is there anything new?”

“What about?”

“About my post in Monsieur’s household.”

“Ah, my dear Malicorne, no one has ventured lately to approach his royal
highness.”

“Well, but now?”

“Now it is quite a different thing; since yesterday he has left off
being jealous.”

“Bah! how has his jealousy subsided?”

“It has been diverted into another channel.”

“Tell me all about it.”

“A report was spread that the king had fallen in love with some one
else, and Monsieur was tranquillized immediately.”

“And who spread the report?”

Montalais lowered her voice. “Between ourselves,” she said, “I think
that Madame and the king have come to a secret understanding about it.”

“Ah!” said Malicorne; “that was the only way to manage it. But what
about poor M. de Guiche?”

“Oh, as for him, he is completely turned off.”

“Have they been writing to each other?”

“No, certainly not; I have not seen a pen in either of their hands for
the last week.”

“On what terms are you with Madame?”

“The very best.”

“And with the king?”

“The king always smiles at me whenever I pass him.”

“Good. Now tell me whom have the two lovers selected to serve as their
screen?”

“La Valliere.”

“Oh, oh, poor girl! We must prevent that!”

“Why?”

“Because, if M. Raoul Bragelonne were to suspect it, he would either
kill her or kill himself.”

“Raoul, poor fellow! do you think so?”

“Women pretend to have a knowledge of the state of people’s affections,”
 said Malicorne, “and they do not even know how to read the thoughts of
their own minds and hearts. Well, I can tell you that M. de Bragelonne
loves La Valliere to such a degree that, if she deceived him, he would,
I repeat, either kill himself or kill her.”

“But the king is there to defend her,” said Montalais.

“The king!” exclaimed Malicorne; “Raoul would kill the king as he would
a common thief.”

“Good heavens!” said Montalais; “you are mad, M. Malicorne.”

“Not in the least. Everything I have told you is, on the contrary,
perfectly serious; and, for my own part, I know one thing.”

“What is that?”

“That I shall quietly tell Raoul of the trick.”

“Hush!” said Montalais, mounting another round of the ladder, so as to
approach Malicorne more closely, “do not open your lips to poor Raoul.”

“Why not?”

“Because, as yet you know nothing at all.”

“What is the matter, then?”

“Why, this evening--but no one is listening, I hope?”

“No.”

“This evening, then, beneath the royal oak, La Valliere said aloud, and
innocently enough, ‘I cannot conceive that when one has once seen the
king, one can ever love another man.’”

Malicorne almost jumped off the wall. “Unhappy girl! did she really say
that?”

“Word for word.”

“And she thinks so?”

“La Valliere always thinks what she says.”

“That positively cries aloud for vengeance. Why, women are the veriest
serpents,” said Malicorne.

“Compose yourself, my dear Malicorne, compose yourself.”

“No, no; let us take the evil in time, on the contrary. There is time
enough yet to tell Raoul of it.”

“Blunderer, on the contrary, it is too late,” replied Montalais.

“How so?”

“La Valliere’s remark, which was intended for the king, reached its
destination.”

“The king knows it, then? The king was told of it, I suppose?”

“The king heard it.”

“_Ahime!_ as the cardinal used to say.”

“The king was hidden in the thicket close to the royal oak.”

“It follows, then,” said Malicorne, “that for the future, the plan which
the king and Madame have arranged, will go as easily as if it were on
wheels, and will pass over poor Bragelonne’s body.”

“Precisely so.”

“Well,” said Malicorne, after a moment’s reflection, “do not let us
interpose our poor selves between a large oak-tree and a great king, for
we should certainly be ground to pieces.”

“The very thing I was going to say to you.”

“Let us think of ourselves, then.”

“My own idea.”

“Open your beautiful eyes, then.”

“And you your large ears.”

“Approach your little mouth for a kiss.”

“Here,” said Montalais, who paid the debt immediately in ringing coin.

“Now let us consider. First, we have M. de Guiche, who is in love with
Madame; then La Valliere, who is in love with the king; next, the king,
who is in love both with Madame and La Valliere; lastly Monsieur, who
loves no one but himself. Among all these loves, a noodle would make his
fortune: a greater reason, therefore, for sensible people like ourselves
to do so.”

“There you are with your dreams again.”

“Nay, rather with realities. Let me still lead you, darling. I do not
think you have been very badly off hitherto?”

“No.”

“Well, the future is guaranteed by the past. Only, since all here think
of themselves before anything else, let us do so too.”

“Perfectly right.”

“But of ourselves only.”

“Be it so.”

“An offensive and defensive alliance.”

“I am ready to swear it.”

“Put out your hand, then, and say, ‘All for Malicorne.’”

“All for Malicorne.”

“And I, ‘All for Montalais,’” replied Malicorne, stretching out his hand
in his turn.

“And now, what is to be done?”

“Keep your eyes and ears constantly open; collect every means of attack
which may be serviceable against others; never let anything lie about
which can be used against ourselves.”

“Agreed.”

“Decided.”

“Sworn to. And now the agreement entered into, good-bye.”

“What do you mean by ‘good-bye?’”

“Of course you can now return to your inn.”

“To my inn?”

“Yes; are you not lodging at the sign of the Beau Paon?”

“Montalais, Montalais, you now betray that you were aware of my being at
Fontainebleau.”

“Well; and what does that prove, except that I occupy myself about you
more than you deserve?”

“Hum!”

“Go back, then, to the Beau Paon.”

“That is now quite out of the question.”

“Have you not a room there?”

“I had, but have it no longer.”

“Who has taken it from you, then?”

“I will tell you. Some little time ago I was returning there, after I
had been running about after you; and having reached my hotel quite out
of breath, I perceived a litter, upon which four peasants were carrying
a sick monk.”

“A monk?”

“Yes, an old gray-bearded Franciscan. As I was looking at the monk, they
entered the hotel; and as they were carrying him up the staircase, I
followed, and as I reached the top of the staircase I observed that they
took him into my room.”

“Into your room?”

“Yes, into my own apartment. Supposing it to be a mistake, I summoned
the landlord, who said that the room which had been let to me for the
past eight days was let to the Franciscan for the ninth.”

“Oh, oh!”

“That was exactly what I said; nay, I did even more, for I was inclined
to get out of temper. I went up-stairs again. I spoke to the Franciscan
himself, and wished to prove to him the impropriety of the step; when
this monk, dying though he seemed to be, raised himself upon his
arm, fixed a pair of blazing eyes upon me, and, in a voice which was
admirably suited for commanding a charge of cavalry, said, ‘Turn this
fellow out of doors;’ which was done, immediately by the landlord and
the four porters, who made me descend the staircase somewhat faster than
was agreeable. This is how it happens, dearest, that I have no lodging.”

“Who can this Franciscan be?” said Montalais. “Is he a general?”

“That is exactly the very title that one of the bearers of the litter
gave him as he spoke to him in a low tone.”

“So that--” said Montalais.

“So that I have no room, no hotel, no lodging; and I am as determined as
my friend Manicamp was just now, not to pass the night in the open air.”

“What is to be done, then?” said Montalais.

“Nothing easier,” said a third voice; whereupon Montalais and Malicorne
uttered a simultaneous cry, and Saint-Aignan appeared. “Dear Monsieur
Malicorne,” said Saint-Aignan, “a very lucky accident has brought me
back to extricate you from your embarrassment. Come, I can offer you a
room in my own apartments, which, I can assure you, no Franciscan will
deprive you of. As for you, my dear lady, rest easy. I already knew
Mademoiselle de la Valliere’s secret, and that of Mademoiselle de
Tonnay-Charente; your own you have just been kind enough to confide
to me; for which I thank you. I can keep three quite as well as one.”
 Malicorne and Montalais looked at each other, like children detected in
a theft; but as Malicorne saw a great advantage in the proposition which
had been made to him, he gave Montalais a sign of assent, which
she returned. Malicorne then descended the ladder, round by round,
reflecting at every step on the means of obtaining piecemeal from M.
de Saint-Aignan all he might possibly know about the famous secret.
Montalais had already darted away like a deer, and neither cross-road
nor labyrinth was able to lead her wrong. As for Saint-Aignan, he
carried off Malicorne with him to his apartments, showing him a thousand
attentions, enchanted to have so close at hand the very two men who,
even supposing De Guiche were to remain silent, could give him the best
information about the maids of honor.



Chapter LI. What Actually Occurred at the Inn Called the Beau Paon.

In the first place, let us supply our readers with a few details
about the inn called Beau Paon. It owed its name to its sign, which
represented a peacock spreading its tail. But, in imitation of certain
painters who bestowed the face of a handsome young man on the serpent
which tempted Eve, the limner of the sign had conferred upon the peacock
the features of a woman. This famous inn, an architectural epigram
against that half of the human race which renders existence delightful,
was situated at Fontainebleau, in the first turning on the left-hand
side, which divides the road from Paris, the large artery that
constitutes in itself alone the entire town of Fontainebleau. The side
street in question was then known as the Rue de Lyon, doubtless because,
geographically, it led in the direction of the second capital of the
kingdom. The street itself was composed of two houses occupied by
persons of the class of tradespeople, the houses being separated by
two large gardens bordered with hedges running round them. Apparently,
however, there were three houses in the street. Let us explain,
notwithstanding appearances, how there were in fact only two. The inn of
the Beau Paon had its principal front towards the main street; but
upon the Rue de Lyon there were two ranges of buildings divided by
courtyards, which comprised sets of apartments for the reception of
all classes of travelers, whether on foot or on horseback, or even with
their own carriages; and in which could be supplied, not only board
and lodging, but also accommodation for exercise, or opportunities
of solitude for even the wealthiest courtiers, whenever, after having
received some check at the court, they wished to shut themselves up to
their own society, either to devour an affront, or to brood on revenge.
From the windows of this part of the building travelers could perceive,
in the first place, the street with the grass growing between the
stones, which were being gradually loosened by it; next the beautiful
hedges of elder and thorn, which embraced, as though within two green
and flowery arms, the house of which we have spoken; and then, in the
spaces between those houses, forming the groundwork of the picture,
and appearing an almost impassable barrier, a line of thick trees,
the advanced sentinels of the vast forest which extends in front of
Fontainebleau. It was therefore easy, provided one secured an apartment
at the angle of the building, to obtain, by the main street from Paris,
a view of, as well as to hear, the passers-by and the _fetes_; and, by
the Rue de Lyon, to look upon and to enjoy the calm of the country. And
this without reckoning that, in cases of urgent necessity, at the very
moment people might be knocking at the principal door in the Rue de
Paris, one could make one’s escape by the little door in the Rue de
Lyon, and, creeping along the gardens of the private houses, attain the
outskirts of the forest. Malicorne, who, it will be remembered, was the
first to speak about this inn, by way of deploring his being turned out
of it, being then absorbed in his own affairs, had not told Montalais
all that could be said about this curious inn; and we will try to repair
the omission. With the exception of the few words he had said about
the Franciscan friar, Malicorne had not given any particulars about
the travelers who were staying in the inn. The manner in which they
had arrived, the manner in which they had lived, the difficulty which
existed for every one but certain privileged travelers, of entering the
hotel without a password, or living there without certain preparatory
precautions, must have struck Malicorne; and, we will venture to say,
really did so. But Malicorne, as we have already said, had personal
matters of his own to occupy his attention which prevented him from
paying much attention to others. In fact, all the apartments of the
hotel were engaged and retained by certain strangers, who never stirred
out, who were incommunicative in their address, with countenances full
of thoughtful preoccupation, and not one of whom was known to Malicorne.
Every one of these travelers had reached the hotel after his own arrival
there; each man had entered after having given a kind of password, which
had at first attracted Malicorne’s attention; but having inquired, in
an indiscreet manner, about it, he had been informed that the host had
given as a reason for this extreme vigilance, that, as the town was so
full of wealthy noblemen, it must also be as full of clever and zealous
pickpockets. The reputation of an honest inn like that of the Beau Paon
was concerned in not allowing its visitors to be robbed. It occasionally
happened that Malicorne asked himself, as he thought matters carefully
over in his mind, and reflected upon his own position in the inn, how it
was that they had allowed him to become an inmate of the hotel, when he
had observed, since his residence there, admission refused to so many.
He asked himself, too, how it was that Manicamp, who, in his opinion,
must be a man to be looked upon with veneration by everybody, having
wished to bait his horse at the Beau Paon, on arriving there, both horse
and rider had been incontinently turned away with a _nescio vos_ of the
most positive character. All this for Malicorne, whose mind being fully
occupied by his own love affair and personal ambition, was a problem
he had not applied himself to solve. Had he wished to do so, we should
hardly venture, notwithstanding the intelligence we have accorded as
his due, to say he would have succeeded. A few words will prove to the
reader that no one but Oedipus in person could have solved the enigma in
question. During the week, seven travelers had taken up their abode in
the inn, all of them having arrived there the day after the fortunate
day on which Malicorne had fixed his choice on the Beau Paon. These
seven persons, accompanied by a suitable retinue, were the following:--

First of all, a brigadier in the German army, his secretary, physician,
three servants, and seven horses. The brigadier’s name was the Comte
de Wostpur.--A Spanish cardinal, with two nephews, two secretaries, an
officer of his household, and twelve horses. The cardinal’s name was
Monseigneur Herrebia.--A rich merchant of Bremen, with his man-servant
and two horses. This merchant’s name was Meinheer Bonstett.--A Venetian
senator with his wife and daughter, both extremely beautiful. The
senator’s name was Signor Marini.--A Scottish laird, with seven
highlanders of his clan, all on foot. The laird’s name was MacCumnor.--
An Austrian from Vienna without title or coat of arms, who had arrived
in a carriage; a good deal of the priest, and something of the soldier.
He was called the Councilor.--And, finally, a Flemish lady, with a
man-servant, a lady’s maid, and a female companion, a large retinue of
servants, great display, and immense horses. She was called the Flemish
lady.

All these travelers had arrived on the same day, and yet their arrival
had occasioned no confusion in the inn, no stoppage in the street;
their apartments had been fixed upon beforehand, by their couriers or
secretaries, who had arrived the previous evening or that very morning.
Malicorne, who had arrived the previous day, riding an ill-conditioned
horse, with a slender valise, had announced himself at the hotel of
the Beau Paon as the friend of a nobleman desirous of witnessing the
_fetes_, and who would himself arrive almost immediately. The landlord,
on hearing these words, had smiled as if he were perfectly well
acquainted either with Malicorne or his friend the nobleman, and had
said to him, “Since you are the first arrival, monsieur, choose what
apartment you please.” And this was said with that obsequiousness of
manners, so full of meaning with landlords, which means, “Make yourself
perfectly easy, monsieur: we know with whom we have to do, and you will
be treated accordingly.” These words, and their accompanying gesture,
Malicorne had thought very friendly, but rather obscure. However, as he
did not wish to be very extravagant in his expenses, and as he thought
that if he were to ask for a small apartment he would doubtless have
been refused, on account of his want of consequence, he hastened to
close at once with the innkeeper’s remark, and deceive him with a
cunning equal to his own. So, smiling as a man would do for whom
whatever might be done was but simply his due, he said, “My dear host, I
shall take the best and the gayest room in the house.”

“With a stable?”

“Yes, with a stable.”

“And when will you take it?”

“Immediately if it be possible.”

“Quite so.”

“But,” said Malicorne, “I shall leave the large room unoccupied for the
present.”

“Very good!” said the landlord, with an air of intelligence.

“Certain reasons, which you will understand by and by, oblige me to
take, at my own cost, this small room only.”

“Yes, yes,” said the host.

“When my friend arrives, he will occupy the large apartment: and as a
matter of course, as this larger apartment will be his own affair, he
will settle for it himself.”

“Certainly,” said the landlord, “certainly; let it be understood in that
manner.”

“It is agreed, then, that such shall be the terms?”

“Word for word.”

“It is extraordinary,” said Malicorne to himself. “You quite understand,
then?”

“Yes.”

“There is nothing more to be said. Since you understand,--for you do
clearly understand, do you not?”

“Perfectly.”

“Very well; and now show me to my room.”

The landlord, cap in hand, preceded Malicorne, who installed himself
in his room, and became more and more surprised to observe that the
landlord, at every ascent or descent, looked and winked at him in a
manner which indicated the best possible intelligence between them.

“There is some mistake here,” said Malicorne to himself; “but until it
is cleared up, I shall take advantage of it, which is the best thing
I can possibly do.” And he darted out of his room, like a hunting-dog
following a scent, in search of all the news and curiosities of the
court, getting himself burnt in one place and drowned in another, as he
had told Mademoiselle de Montalais. The day after he had been installed
in his room, he had noticed the seven travelers arrive successively, who
speedily filled the whole hotel. When he saw this perfect multitude
of people, of carriages, and retinue, Malicorne rubbed his hands
delightedly, thinking that, one day later, he should not have found a
bed to lie upon after his return from his exploring expeditions. When
all the travelers were lodged, the landlord entered Malicorne’s room,
and with his accustomed courteousness, said to him, “You are aware, my
dear monsieur, that the large room in the third detached building is
still reserved for you?”

“Of course I am aware of it.”

“I am really making you a present of it.”

“Thank you.”

“So that when your friend comes--”

“Well!”

“He will be satisfied with me, I hope: or, if he be not, he will be very
difficult to please.”

“Excuse me, but will you allow me to say a few words about my friend?”

“Of course, for you have a perfect right to do so.”

“He intended to come, as you know.”

“And he does so still.”

“He may possibly have changed his opinion.”

“No.”

“You are quite sure, then?”

“Quite sure.”

“But in case you should have some doubt.”

“Well!”

“I can only say that I do not positively assure you that he will come.”

“Yet he told you--”

“He certainly did tell me; but you know that man proposes and God
disposes,--_verba volant, scripta manent_.”

“Which is as much to say--”

“That what is spoken flies away, and what is written remains; and, as
he did not write to me, but contented himself by saying to me, ‘I will
authorize you, yet without specifically instructing you,’ you must feel
that it places me in a very embarrassing position.”

“What do you authorize me to do, then?”

“Why, to let your rooms if you find a good tenant for them.”

“I?”

“Yes, you.”

“Never will I do such a thing, monsieur. If he has not written to you,
he has written to me.”

“Ah! what does he say? Let us see if his letter agrees with his words.”

“These are almost his very words. ‘To the landlord of the Beau Paon
Hotel,--You will have been informed of the meeting arranged to take
place in your inn between some people of importance; I shall be one of
those who will meet with the others at Fontainebleau. Keep for me, then,
a small room for a friend who will arrive either before or after me--’
and you are the friend, I suppose,” said the landlord, interrupting his
reading of the letter. Malicorne bowed modestly. The landlord continued:

“‘And a large apartment for myself. The large apartment is my own
affair, but I wish the price of the smaller room to be moderate, as it
is destined for a fellow who is deucedly poor.’ It is still you he is
speaking of, is he not?” said the host.

“Oh, certainly,” said Malicorne.

“Then we are agreed; your friend will settle for his apartment, and you
for your own.”

“May I be broken alive on the wheel,” said Malicorne to himself, “if
I understand anything at all about it,” and then he said aloud, “Well,
then, are you satisfied with the name?”

“With what name?”

“With the name at the end of the letter. Does it give you the guarantee
you require?”

“I was going to ask you the name.”

“What! was the letter not signed?”

“No,” said the landlord, opening his eyes very wide, full of mystery and
curiosity.

“In that case,” said Malicorne, imitating his gesture and his mysterious
look, “if he has not given you his name, you understand, he must have
his reasons for it.”

“Oh, of course.”

“And, therefore, I, his friend, his confidant, must not betray him.”

“You are perfectly right, monsieur,” said the landlord, “and I do not
insist upon it.”

“I appreciate your delicacy. As for myself, as my friend told you,
my room is a separate affair, so let us come to terms about it. Short
accounts make long friends. How much is it?”

“There is no hurry.”

“Never mind, let us reckon it all up all the same. Room, my own board, a
place in the stable for my horse, and his feed. How much per day?”

“Four livres, monsieur.”

“Which will make twelve livres for the three days I have been here?”

“Yes, monsieur.”

“Here are your twelve livres, then.”

“But why settle now?”

“Because,” said Malicorne, lowering his voice, and resorting to his
former air of mystery, because he saw that the mysterious had succeeded,
“because if I had to set off suddenly, to decamp at any moment, my
account would be settled.”

“You are right, monsieur.”

“I may consider myself at home, then?”

“Perfectly.”

“So far so well. Adieu!” And the landlord withdrew. Malicorne, left
alone, reasoned with himself in the following manner: “No one but De
Guiche or Manicamp could have written to this fellow; De Guiche, because
he wishes to secure a lodging for himself beyond the precincts of the
court, in the event of his success or failure, as the case might be;
Manicamp, because De Guiche must have intrusted him with his commission.
And De Guiche or Manicamp will have argued in this manner. The large
apartment would serve for the reception, in a befitting manner, of a
lady thickly veiled, reserving to the lady in question a double means
of exit, either in a street somewhat deserted, or closely adjoining the
forest. The smaller room might either shelter Manicamp for a time, who
is De Guiche’s confidant, and would be the vigilant keeper of the door,
or De Guiche himself, acting, for greater safety, the part of a master
and confidant at the same time. Yet,” he continued, “how about this
meeting which is to take place, and which has actually taken place, in
this hotel? No doubt they are persons who are going to be presented to
the king. And the ‘poor devil,’ for whom the smaller room is destined,
is a trick, in order to better conceal De Guiche or Manicamp. If this
be the case, as very likely it is, there is only half the mischief done,
for there is simply the length of a purse string between Manicamp and
Malicorne.” After he had thus reasoned the matter out, Malicorne slept
soundly, leaving the seven travelers to occupy, and in every sense
of the word to walk up and down, their several lodgings in the hotel.
Whenever there was nothing at court to put him out, when he had wearied
himself with his excursions and investigations, tired of writing letters
which he could never find an opportunity of delivering to the people
they were intended for, he returned home to his comfortable little room,
and leaning upon the balcony, which was filled with nasturtiums and
white pinks, for whom Fontainebleau seemed to possess no attractions
with all its illuminations, amusements, and _fetes_.

Things went on in this manner until the seventh day, a day of which
we have given such full details, with its night also, in the preceding
chapters. On that night Malicorne was enjoying the fresh air, seated at
his window, toward one o’clock in the morning, when Manicamp appeared on
horseback, with a thoughtful and listless air.

“Good!” said Malicorne to himself, recognizing him at the first glance;
“there’s my friend, who is come to take possession of his apartment,
that is to say, of my room.” And he called to Manicamp, who looked up
and immediately recognized Malicorne.

“Ah! by Jove!” said the former, his countenance clearing up, “glad to
see you, Malicorne. I have been wandering about Fontainebleau, looking
for three things I cannot find: De Guiche, a room, and a stable.”

“Of M. de Guiche I cannot give you either good or bad news, for I have
not seen him; but as far as concerns your room and a stable, that’s
another matter, for they have been retained here for you.”

“Retained--and by whom?”

“By yourself, I presume.”

“By _me?_”

“Do you mean to say you did not take lodgings here?”

“By no means,” said Manicamp.

At this moment the landlord appeared on the threshold of the door.

“I want a room,” said Manicamp.

“Did you engage one, monsieur?”

“No.”

“Then I have no rooms to let.”

“In that case, I have engaged a room,” said Manicamp.

“A room simply, or lodgings?”

“Anything you please.”

“By letter?” inquired the landlord.

Malicorne nodded affirmatively to Manicamp.

“Of course by letter,” said Manicamp. “Did you not receive a letter from
me?”

“What was the date of the letter?” inquired the host, in whom Manicamp’s
hesitation had aroused some suspicion.

Manicamp rubbed his ear, and looked up at Malicorne’s window; but
Malicorne had left his window and was coming down the stairs to his
friend’s assistance. At the very same moment, a traveler, wrapped in
a large Spanish cloak, appeared at the porch, near enough to hear the
conversation.

“I ask you what was the date of the letter you wrote to me to retain
apartments here?” repeated the landlord, pressing the question.

“Last Wednesday was the date,” said the mysterious stranger, in a soft
and polished tone of voice, touching the landlord on the shoulder.

Manicamp drew back, and it was now Malicorne’s turn, who appeared on the
threshold, to scratch his ear. The landlord saluted the new arrival as a
man who recognizes his true guest.

“Monsieur,” he said to him, with civility, “your apartment is ready
for you, and the stables too, only--” He looked round him and inquired,
“Your horses?”

“My horses may or may not arrive. That, however, matters but little
to you, provided you are paid for what has been engaged.” The landlord
bowed lower still.

“You have,” continued the unknown traveler, “kept for me in addition,
the small room I asked for?”

“Oh!” said Malicorne, endeavoring to hide himself.

“Your friend has occupied it during the last week,” said the landlord,
pointing to Malicorne, who was trying to make himself as small as
possible. The traveler, drawing his cloak round him so as to cover the
lower part of his face, cast a rapid glance at Malicorne, and said,
“This gentleman is no friend of mine.”

The landlord started violently.

“I am not acquainted with this gentleman,” continued the traveler.

“What!” exclaimed the host, turning to Malicorne, “are you not this
gentleman’s friend, then?”

“What does it matter whether I am or not, provided you are paid?” said
Malicorne, parodying the stranger’s remark in a very majestic manner.

“It matters so far as this,” said the landlord, who began to perceive
that one person had been taken for another, “that I beg you, monsieur,
to leave the rooms, which had been engaged beforehand, and by some one
else instead of you.”

“Still,” said Malicorne, “this gentleman cannot require at the same
time a room on the first floor and an apartment on the second. If this
gentleman will take the room, I will take the apartment: if he prefers
the apartment, I will be satisfied with the room.”

“I am exceedingly distressed, monsieur,” said the traveler in his soft
voice, “but I need both the room and the apartment.”

“At least, tell me for whom?” inquired Malicorne.

“The apartment I require for myself.”

“Very well; but the room?”

“Look,” said the traveler, pointing towards a sort of procession which
was approaching.

Malicorne looked in the direction indicated, and observed borne upon
a litter, the arrival of the Franciscan, whose installation in his
apartment he had, with a few details of his own, related to Montalais,
and whom he had so uselessly endeavored to convert to humbler views. The
result of the arrival of the stranger, and of the sick Franciscan, was
Malicorne’s expulsion, without any consideration for his feelings,
from the inn, by the landlord and the peasants who had carried the
Franciscan. The details have already been given of what followed this
expulsion; of Manicamp’s conversation with Montalais; how Manicamp, with
greater cleverness than Malicorne had shown, had succeeded in obtaining
news of De Guiche, of the subsequent conversation of Montalais with
Malicorne, and, finally, of the billets with which the Comte de
Saint-Aignan had furnished Manicamp and Malicorne. It remains for us
to inform our readers who was the traveler in the cloak--the principal
tenant of the double apartment, of which Malicorne had only occupied
a portion--and the Franciscan, quite as mysterious a personage, whose
arrival, together with that of the stranger, unfortunately upset the two
friends’ plans.



Chapter LII. A Jesuit of the Eleventh Year.

In the first place, in order not to weary the reader’s patience, we will
hasten to answer the first question. The traveler with the cloak held
over his face was Aramis, who, after he had left Fouquet, and taken
from a portmanteau, which his servant had opened, a cavalier’s complete
costume, quitted the chateau, and went to the hotel of the Beau Paon,
where, by letters, seven or eight days previously, he had, as the
landlord had stated, directed a room and an apartment to be retained
for him. Immediately after Malicorne and Manicamp had been turned out,
Aramis approached the Franciscan, and asked him whether he would prefer
the apartment or the room. The Franciscan inquired where they were both
situated. He was told that the room was on the first, and the apartment
on the second floor.

“The room, then,” he said.

Aramis did not contradict him, but, with great submissiveness, said to
the landlord: “The room.” And bowing with respect he withdrew into the
apartment, and the Franciscan was accordingly carried at once into the
room. Now, is it not extraordinary that this respect should be shown by
a prelate of the Church for a simple monk, for one, too, belonging to a
mendicant order; to whom was given up, without a request for it even, a
room which so many travelers were desirous of obtaining? How, too, can
one explain the unexpected arrival of Aramis at the hotel--he who had
entered the chateau with M. Fouquet, and could have remained at the
chateau with M. Fouquet if he had liked? The Franciscan supported his
removal up the staircase without uttering a complaint, although it was
evident he suffered very much, and that every time the litter knocked
against the wall or the railing of the staircase, he experienced a
terrible shock throughout his frame. And finally, when he had arrived in
the room, he said to those who carried him: “Help me to place myself in
that armchair.” The bearers of the litter placed it on the ground, and
lifting the sick man up as gently as possible, carried him to the chair
he had indicated, which was situated at the head of the bed. “Now,” he
added, with a marked benignity of gesture and tone, “desire the landlord
to come.”

They obeyed, and five minutes afterwards the landlord appeared at the
door.

“Be kind enough,” said the Franciscan to him, “to send these excellent
fellows away; they are vassals of the Vicomte de Melun. They found
me when I had fainted on the road overcome by the heat, and without
thinking of whether they would be paid for their trouble, they wished to
carry me to their own home. But I know at what cost to themselves is the
hospitality which the poor extend to a sick monk, and I preferred this
hotel, where, moreover, I was expected.”

The landlord looked at the Franciscan in amazement, but the latter,
with his thumb, made the sign of the cross in a peculiar manner upon his
breast. The host replied by making a similar sign on his left shoulder.
“Yes, indeed,” he said, “we did expect you, but we hoped that you would
arrive in a better state of health.” And as the peasants were looking
at the innkeeper, usually so supercilious, and saw how respectful he had
become in the presence of a poor monk, the Franciscan drew from a deep
pocket three or four pieces of gold which he held out.

“My friends,” said he, “here is something to repay you for the care
you have taken of me. So make yourselves perfectly easy, and do not be
afraid of leaving me here. The order to which I belong, and for which
I am traveling, does not require me to beg; only, as the attention you
have shown me deserves to be rewarded, take these two louis and depart
in peace.”

The peasants did not dare to take them; the landlord took the two louis
out of the monk’s hand and placed them in that of one of the peasants,
all four of whom withdrew, opening their eyes wider than ever. The door
was then closed; and, while the innkeeper stood respectfully near it,
the Franciscan collected himself for a moment. He then passed across
his sallow face a hand which seemed dried up by fever, and rubbed his
nervous and agitated fingers across his beard. His large eyes, hollowed
by sickness and inquietude, seemed to peruse in the vague distance a
mournful and fixed idea.

“What physicians have you at Fontainebleau?” he inquired, after a long
pause.

“We have three, holy father.”

“What are their names?”

“Luiniguet first.”

“The next one?”

“A brother of the Carmelite order, named Brother Hubert.”

“The next?”

“A secular member, named Grisart.”

“Ah! Grisart?” murmured the monk, “send for M. Grisart immediately.”

The landlord moved in prompt obedience to the direction.

“Tell me what priests are there here?”

“What priests?”

“Yes; belonging to what orders?”

“There are Jesuits, Augustines, and Cordeliers; but the Jesuits are the
closest at hand. Shall I send for a confessor belonging to the order of
Jesuits?”

“Yes, immediately.”

It will be imagined that, at the sign of the cross which they had
exchanged, the landlord and the invalid monk had recognized each other
as two affiliated members of the well-known Society of Jesus. Left to
himself, the Franciscan drew from his pocket a bundle of papers, some of
which he read over with the most careful attention. The violence of
his disorder, however, overcame his courage; his eyes rolled in their
sockets, a cold sweat poured down his face, and he nearly fainted, and
lay with his head thrown backwards and his arms hanging down on both
sides of his chair. For more than five minutes he remained without any
movement, when the landlord returned, bringing with him the physician,
whom he hardly allowed time to dress himself. The noise they made in
entering the room, the current of air, which the opening of the door
occasioned, restored the Franciscan to his senses. He hurriedly seized
hold of the papers which were lying about, and with his long and bony
hand concealed them under the cushions of the chair. The landlord went
out of the room, leaving patient and physician together.

“Come here, Monsieur Grisart,” said the Franciscan to the doctor;
“approach closer, for there is no time to lose. Try, by touch and sound,
and consider and pronounce your sentence.”

“The landlord,” replied the doctor, “told me I had the honor of
attending an affiliated brother.”

“Yes,” replied the Franciscan, “it is so. Tell me the truth, then; I
feel very ill, and I think I am about to die.”

The physician took the monk’s hand, and felt his pulse. “Oh, oh,” he
said, “a dangerous fever.”

“What do you call a dangerous fever?” inquired the Franciscan, with an
imperious look.

“To an affiliated member of the first or second year,” replied the
physician, looking inquiringly at the monk, “I should say--a fever that
may be cured.”

“But to me?” said the Franciscan. The physician hesitated.

“Look at my grey hair, and my forehead, full of anxious thought,” he
continued: “look at the lines in my face, by which I reckon up the
trials I have undergone; I am a Jesuit of the eleventh year, Monsieur
Grisart.” The physician started, for, in fact, a Jesuit of the eleventh
year was one of those men who had been initiated in all the secrets
of the order, one of those for whom science has no more secrets, the
society no further barriers to present--temporal obedience, no more
trammels.

“In that case,” said Grisart, saluting him with respect, “I am in the
presence of a master?”

“Yes; act, therefore, accordingly.”

“And you wish to know?”

“My real state.”

“Well,” said the physician, “it is a brain fever, which has reached its
highest degree of intensity.”

“There is no hope, then?” inquired the Franciscan, in a quick tone of
voice.

“I do not say that,” replied the doctor; “yet, considering the
disordered state of the brain, the hurried respiration, the rapidity of
the pulse, and the burning nature of the fever which is devouring you--”

“And which has thrice prostrated me since this morning,” said the monk.

“All things considered, I shall call it a terrible attack. But why did
you not stop on your road?”

“I was expected here, and I was obliged to come.”

“Even at the risk of your life?”

“Yes, at the risk of dying on the way.”

“Very well. Considering all the symptoms of your case, I must tell you
that your condition is almost desperate.”

The Franciscan smiled in a strange manner.

“What you have just told me is, perhaps, sufficient for what is due to
an affiliated member, even of the eleventh year; but for what is due
to me, Monsieur Grisart, it is too little, and I have a right to demand
more. Come, then, let us be more candid still, and as frank as if you
were making your own confession to Heaven. Besides, I have already sent
for a confessor.”

“Oh! I have hopes, however,” murmured the doctor.

“Answer me,” said the sick man, displaying with a dignified gesture
a golden ring, the stone of which had until that moment been turned
inside, and which bore engraved thereon the distinguishing mark of the
Society of Jesus.

Grisart uttered loud exclamation. “The general!” he cried.

“Silence,” said the Franciscan., “you can now understand that the whole
truth is all important.”

“Monseigneur, monseigneur,” murmured Grisart, “send for the confessor,
for in two hours, at the next seizure, you will be attacked by delirium,
and will pass away in its course.”

“Very well,” said the patient, for a moment contracting his eyebrows, “I
have still two hours to live then?”

“Yes; particularly if you take the potion I will send you presently.”

“And that will give me two hours of life?”

“Two hours.”

“I would take it, were it poison, for those two hours are necessary not
only for myself, but for the glory of the order.”

“What a loss, what a catastrophe for us all!” murmured the physician.

“It is the loss of one man--nothing more,” replied the Franciscan, “for
Heaven will enable the poor monk, who is about to leave you, to find
a worthy successor. Adieu, Monsieur Grisart; already even, through the
goodness of Heaven, I have met with you. A physician who had not been
one of our holy order, would have left me in ignorance of my condition;
and, confident that existence would be prolonged a few days further, I
should not have taken the necessary precautions. You are a learned man,
Monsieur Grisart, and that confers an honor upon us all; it would have
been repugnant to my feelings to have found one of our order of little
standing in his profession. Adieu, Monsieur Grisart; send me the cordial
immediately.”

“Give me your blessing, at least, monseigneur.”

“In my mind, I do; go, go; in my mind, I do so, I tell you--_animo_,
Maitre Grisart, _viribus impossibile_.” And he again fell back on the
armchair, in an almost senseless state. M. Grisart hesitated, whether
he should give him immediate assistance, or should run to prepare the
cordial he had promised. He decided in favor of the cordial, for he
darted out of the room and disappeared down the staircase. [6]



Chapter LIII. The State Secret.

A few moments after the doctor’s departure, the confessor arrived. He
had hardly crossed the threshold of the door when the Franciscan fixed
a penetrating look upon him, and, shaking his head, murmured--“A weak
mind, I see; may Heaven forgive me if I die without the help of this
living piece of human infirmity.” The confessor, on his side, regarded
the dying man with astonishment, almost with terror. He had never beheld
eyes so burningly bright at the very moment they were about to close,
nor looks so terrible at the moment they were about to be quenched in
death. The Franciscan made a rapid and imperious movement of his hand.
“Sit down, there, my father,” he said, “and listen to me.” The Jesuit
confessor, a good priest, a recently initiated member of the order,
who had merely seen the beginning of its mysteries, yielded to the
superiority assumed by the penitent.

“There are several persons staying in this hotel,” continued the
Franciscan.

“But,” inquired the Jesuit, “I thought I had been summoned to listen to
a confession. Is your remark, then, a confession?”

“Why do you ask?”

“In order to know whether I am to keep your words secret.”

“My remarks are part of my confession; I confide them to you in your
character of a confessor.”

“Very well,” said the priest, seating himself on the chair which the
Franciscan had, with great difficulty, just left, to lie down on the
bed.

The Franciscan continued,--“I repeat, there are several persons staying
in this inn.”

“So I have heard.”

“They ought to be eight in number.”

The Jesuit made a sign that he understood him. “The first to whom I wish
to speak,” said the dying man, “is a German from Vienna, whose name is
Baron de Wostpur. Be kind enough to go to him, and tell him the person
he expected has arrived.” The confessor, astounded, looked at his
penitent; the confession seemed a singular one.

“Obey,” said the Franciscan, in a tone of command impossible to resist.
The good Jesuit, completely subdued, rose and left the room. As soon as
he had gone, the Franciscan again took up the papers which a crisis of
the fever had already, once before, obliged him to put aside.

“The Baron de Wostpur? Good!” he said; “ambitious, a fool, and
straitened in means.”

He folded up the papers, which he thrust under his pillow. Rapid
footsteps were heard at the end of the corridor. The confessor returned,
followed by the Baron de Wostpur, who walked along with his head raised,
as if he were discussing with himself the possibility of touching the
ceiling with the feather in his hat. Therefore, at the appearance of
the Franciscan, at his melancholy look, and seeing the plainness of the
room, he stopped, and inquired,--“Who has summoned me?”

“I,” said the Franciscan, who turned towards the confessor, saying, “My
good father, leave us for a moment together; when this gentleman leaves,
you will return here.” The Jesuit left the room, and, doubtless, availed
himself of this momentary exile from the presence of the dying man
to ask the host for some explanation about this strange penitent, who
treated his confessor no better than he would a man servant. The baron
approached the bed, and wished to speak, but the hand of the Franciscan
imposed silence upon him.

“Every moment is precious,” said the latter, hurriedly. “You have come
here for the competition, have you not?”

“Yes, my father.”

“You hope to be elected general of the order?”

“I hope so.”

“You know on what conditions only you can possibly attain this high
position, which makes one man the master of monarchs, the equal of
popes?”

“Who are you,” inquired the baron, “to subject me to these
interrogations?”

“I am he whom you expected.”

“The elector-general?”

“I am the elected.”

“You are--”

The Franciscan did not give him time to reply; he extended his shrunken
hand, on which glittered the ring of the general of the order. The baron
drew back in surprise; and then, immediately afterwards, bowing with the
profoundest respect, he exclaimed,--“Is it possible that you are here,
monseigneur; you, in this wretched room; you, upon this miserable bed;
you, in search of and selecting the future general, that is, your own
successor?”

“Do not distress yourself about that, monsieur, but fulfil immediately
the principal condition, of furnishing the order with a secret of
importance, of such importance that one of the greatest courts of Europe
will, by your instrumentality, forever be subjected to the order. Well!
do you possess the secret which you promised, in your request, addressed
to the grand council?”

“Monseigneur--”

“Let us proceed, however, in due order,” said the monk. “You are the
Baron de Wostpur?”

“Yes, monseigneur.”

“And this letter is from you?”

“Yes, monseigneur.”

The general of the Jesuits drew a paper from his bundle, and presented
it to the baron, who glanced at it, and made a sign in the affirmative,
saying, “Yes, monseigneur, this letter is mine.”

“Can you show me the reply which the secretary of the grand council
returned to you?”

“Here it is,” said the baron, holding towards the Franciscan a letter
bearing simply the address, “To his excellency the Baron de Wostpur,”
 and containing only this phrase, “From the 15th to the 22nd May,
Fontainebleau, the hotel of the Beau Paon.--A. M. D. G.” [7]

“Right,” said the Franciscan, “and now speak.”

“I have a body of troops, composed of 50,000 men; all the officers are
gained over. I am encamped on the Danube. In four days I can overthrow
the emperor, who is, as you are aware, opposed to the progress of our
order, and can replace him by whichever of the princes of his family the
order may determine upon.” The Franciscan listened, unmoved.

“Is that all?” he said.

“A revolution throughout Europe is included in my plan,” said the baron.

“Very well, Monsieur de Wostpur, you will receive a reply; return to
your room, and leave Fontainebleau within a quarter of an hour.” The
baron withdrew backwards, as obsequiously as if he were taking leave of
the emperor he was ready to betray.

“There is no secret there,” murmured the Franciscan, “it is a plot.
Besides,” he added, after a moment’s reflection, “the future of Europe
is no longer in the hands of the House of Austria.”

And with a pencil he held in his hand, he struck the Baron de Wostpur’s
name from the list.

“Now for the cardinal,” he said; “we ought to get something more serious
from the side of Spain.”

Raising his head, he perceived the confessor, who was awaiting his
orders as respectfully as a school-boy.

“Ah, ah!” he said, noticing his submissive air, “you have been talking
with the landlord.”

“Yes, monseigneur; and to the physician.”

“To Grisart?”

“Yes.”

“He is here, then?”

“He is waiting with the potion he promised.”

“Very well; if I require him, I will call; you now understand the great
importance of my confession, do you not?”

“Yes, monseigneur.”

“Then go and fetch me the Spanish Cardinal Herrebia. Make haste. Only,
as you now understand the matter in hand, you will remain near me, for I
begin to feel faint.”

“Shall I summon the physician?”

“Not yet, not yet... the Spanish cardinal, no one else. Fly.”

Five minutes afterwards, the cardinal, pale and disturbed, entered the
little room.

“I am informed, monseigneur,--” stammered the cardinal.

“To the point,” said the Franciscan, in a faint voice, showing the
cardinal a letter which he had written to the grand council. “Is that
your handwriting?”

“Yes, but--”

“And your summons?”

The cardinal hesitated to answer. His purple revolted against the mean
garb of the poor Franciscan, who stretched out his hand and displayed
the ring, which produced its effect, greater in proportion to the
greatness of the person over whom the Franciscan exercised his
influence.

“Quick, the secret, the secret!” said the dying man, leaning upon his
confessor.

“_Coram isto?_” inquired the Spanish cardinal. [8]

“Speak in Spanish,” said the Franciscan, showing the liveliest
attention.

“You are aware, monseigneur,” said the cardinal, continuing the
conversation in Castilian, “that the condition of the marriage of the
Infanta with the king of France was the absolute renunciation of the
rights of the said Infanta, as well as of King Louis XIV., to all claim
to the crown of Spain.” The Franciscan made a sign in the affirmative.

“The consequence is,” continued the cardinal, “that the peace and
alliance between the two kingdoms depend upon the observance of that
clause of the contract.” A similar sign from the Franciscan. “Not only
France and Spain,” continued the cardinal, “but the whole of Europe
even, would be violently rent asunder by the faithlessness of either
party.” Another movement of the dying man’s head.

“It further results,” continued the speaker, “that the man who might be
able to foresee events, and to render certain that which is no more than
a vague idea floating in the mind of man, that is to say, the idea of a
future good or evil, would preserve the world from a great catastrophe;
and the event, which has no fixed certainty even in the brain of him who
originated it, could be turned to the advantage of our order.”

“_Pronto_, _pronto!_” murmured the Franciscan, in Spanish, who suddenly
became paler, and leaned upon the priest. The cardinal approached the
ear of the dying man, and said, “Well, monseigneur, I know that the king
of France has determined that, at the very first pretext, a death for
instance, either that of the king of Spain, or that of a brother of the
Infanta, France will, arms in hand, claim the inheritance, and I have in
my possession, already prepared, the plan of policy agreed upon by Louis
XIV. for this occasion.”

“And this plan?” said the Franciscan.

“Here it is,” returned the cardinal.

“In whose handwriting is it?”

“My own.”

“Have you anything further to say to me?”

“I think I have said a good deal, my lord,” replied the cardinal.

“Yes, you have rendered the order a great service. But how did you
procure the details, by the aid of which you have constructed your
plan?”

“I have the under-servants of the king of France in my pay, and I obtain
from them all the waste papers, which have been saved from being burnt.”

“Very ingenious,” murmured the Franciscan, endeavoring to smile; “you
will leave this hotel, cardinal, in a quarter of an hour, and a reply
shall be sent you.” The cardinal withdrew.

“Call Grisart, and desire the Venetian Marini to come,” said the sick
man.

While the confessor obeyed, the Franciscan, instead of striking out the
cardinal’s name, as he had done the baron’s, made a cross at the side
of it. Then, exhausted by the effort, he fell back on his bed, murmuring
the name of Dr. Grisart. When he returned to his senses, he had drunk
about half of the potion, of which the remainder was left in the glass,
and he found himself supported by the physician, while the Venetian and
the confessor were standing close to the door. The Venetian submitted to
the same formalities as his two predecessors, hesitated as they had done
at the sight of the two strangers, but his confidence restored by the
order of the general, he revealed that the pope, terrified at the
power of the order, was weaving a plot for the general expulsion of the
Jesuits, and was tampering with the different courts of Europe in order
to obtain their assistance. He described the pontiff’s auxiliaries,
his means of action, and indicated the particular locality in the
Archipelago where, by a sudden surprise, two cardinals, adepts of
the eleventh year, and, consequently, high in authority, were to be
transported, together with thirty-two of the principal affiliated
members of Rome. The Franciscan thanked the Signor Marini. It was by no
means a slight service he had rendered the society by denouncing this
pontifical project. The Venetian thereupon received directions to
set off in a quarter of an hour, and left as radiant as if he already
possessed the ring, the sign of the supreme authority of the society.
As, however, he was departing, the Franciscan murmured to himself:
“All these men are either spies, or a sort of police, not one of them a
general; they have all discovered a plot, but not one of them a secret.
It is not by means of ruin, or war, or force, that the Society of Jesus
is to be governed, but by that mysterious influence moral superiority
alone confers. No, the man is not yet found, and to complete the
misfortune, Heaven strikes me down, and I am dying. Oh! must the society
indeed fall with me for want of a column to support it? Must death,
which is waiting for me, swallow up with me the future of the order;
that future which ten years more of my own life would have rendered
eternal? for that future, with the reign of the new king, is
opening radiant and full of splendor.” These words, which had been
half-reflected, half-pronounced aloud, were listened to by the Jesuit
confessor with a terror similar to that with which one listens to the
wanderings of a person attacked by fever, whilst Grisart, with a mind of
higher order, devoured them as the revelations of an unknown world, in
which his looks were plunged without ability to comprehend. Suddenly the
Franciscan recovered himself.

“Let us finish this,” he said; “death is approaching. Oh! just now I
was dying resignedly, for I hoped... while now I sink in despair, unless
those who remain... Grisart, Grisart, give me to live a single hour
longer.”

Grisart approached the dying monk, and made him swallow a few drops, not
of the potion which was still left in the glass, but of the contents of
a small bottle he had upon his person.

“Call the Scotchman!” exclaimed the Franciscan; “call the Bremen
merchant. Call, call quickly. I am dying. I am suffocated.”

The confessor darted forward to seek assistance, as if there had been
any human strength which could hold back the hand of death, which was
weighing down the sick man; but, at the threshold of the door, he
found Aramis, who, with his finger on his lips, like the statue of
Harpocrates, the god of silence, by a look motioned him back to the
end of the apartment. The physician and the confessor, after having
consulted each other by looks, made a movement as if to push Aramis
aside, who, however, with two signs of the cross, each made in a
different manner, transfixed them both in their places.

“A chief!” they both murmured.

Aramis slowly advanced into the room where the dying man was struggling
against the first attack of the agony which had seized him. As for the
Franciscan, whether owing to the effect of the elixir, or whether the
appearance of Aramis had restored his strength, he made a movement, and
his eyes glaring, his mouth half open, and his hair damp with sweat, sat
up upon the bed. Aramis felt that the air of the room was stifling; the
windows were closed; the fire was burning upon the hearth; a pair of
candles of yellow wax were guttering down in the copper candlesticks,
and still further increased, by their thick smoke, the temperature of
the room. Aramis opened the window, and fixing upon the dying man a
look full of intelligence and respect, said to him: “Monseigneur, pray
forgive my coming in this manner, before you summoned me, but your state
alarms me, and I thought you might possibly die before you had seen me,
for I am but the sixth upon your list.”

The dying man started and looked at the list.

“You are, therefore, he who was formerly called Aramis, and since, the
Chevalier d’Herblay? You are the bishop of Vannes?”

“Yes, my lord.”

“I know you, I have seen you.”

“At the last jubilee, we were with the Holy Father together.”

“Yes, yes, I remember; and you place yourself on the list of
candidates?”

“Monseigneur, I have heard it said that the order required to become
possessed of a great state secret, and knowing that from modesty you
had in anticipation resigned your functions in favor of the person who
should be the depositary of such a secret, I wrote to say that I was
ready to compete, possessing alone a secret I believe to be important.”

“Speak,” said the Franciscan; “I am ready to listen to you, and to judge
the importance of the secret.”

“A secret of the value of that which I have the honor to confide to
you cannot be communicated by word of mouth. Any idea which, when once
expressed, has thereby lost its safeguard, and has become vulgarized
by any manifestation or communication of it whatever, no longer is the
property of him who gave it birth. My words may be overheard by some
listener, or perhaps by an enemy; one ought not, therefore, to speak at
random, for, in such a case, the secret would cease to be one.”

“How do you propose, then, to convey your secret?” inquired the dying
monk.

With one hand Aramis signed to the physician and the confessor to
withdraw, and with the other he handed to the Franciscan a paper
enclosed in a double envelope.

“Is not writing more dangerous still than language?”

“No, my lord,” said Aramis, “for you will find within this envelope
characters which you and I alone can understand.” The Franciscan looked
at Aramis with an astonishment which momentarily increased.

“It is a cipher,” continued the latter, “which you used in 1655, and
which your secretary, Juan Jujan, who is dead, could alone decipher, if
he were restored to life.”

“You knew this cipher, then?”

“It was I who taught it him,” said Aramis, bowing with a gracefulness
full of respect, and advancing towards the door as if to leave the room:
but a gesture of the Franciscan accompanied by a cry for him to remain,
restrained him.

“_Ecce homo!_” he exclaimed; then reading the paper a second time, he
called out, “Approach, approach quickly!”

Aramis returned to the side of the Franciscan, with the same calm
countenance and the same respectful manner, unchanged. The Franciscan,
extending his arm, burnt by the flame of the candle the paper which
Aramis had handed him. Then, taking hold of Aramis’s hand, he drew him
towards him, and inquired: “In what manner and by whose means could you
possibly become acquainted with such a secret?”

“Through Madame de Chevreuse, the intimate friend and _confidante_ of
the queen.”

“And Madame de Chevreuse--”

“Is dead.”

“Did any others know it?”

“A man and a woman only, and they of the lower classes.”

“Who are they?”

“Persons who had brought him up.”

“What has become of them?”

“Dead also. This secret burns like vitriol.”

“But you survive?”

“No one is aware that I know it.”

“And for what length of time have you possessed this secret?”

“For the last fifteen years.”

“And you have kept it?”

“I wished to live.”

“And you give it to the order without ambition, without
acknowledgement?”

“I give it to the order with ambition and with a hope of return,” said
Aramis; “for if you live, my lord, you will make of me, now you know me,
what I can and ought to be.”

“And as I am dying,” exclaimed the Franciscan, “I constitute you my
successor... Thus.” And drawing off the ring, he passed it on Aramis’s
finger. Then, turning towards the two spectators of this scene, he said:
“Be ye witnesses of this, and testify, if need be, that, sick in body,
but sound in mind, I have freely and voluntarily bestowed this ring,
the token of supreme authority, upon Monseigneur d’Herblay, bishop
of Vannes, whom I nominate my successor, and before whom I, an humble
sinner, about to appear before Heaven, prostrate myself, as an example
for all to follow.” And the Franciscan bowed lowly and submissively,
whilst the physician and the Jesuit fell on their knees. Aramis,
even while he became paler than the dying man himself, bent his looks
successively upon all the actors of this scene. Profoundly gratified
ambition flowed with life-blood towards his heart.

“We must lose no time,” said the Franciscan; “what I had still to do on
earth was urgent. I shall never succeed in carrying it out.”

“I will do it,” said Aramis.

“It is well,” said the Franciscan, and then turning towards the Jesuit
and the doctor, he added, “Leave us alone,” a direction they instantly
obeyed.

“With this sign,” he said, “you are the man needed to shake the world
from one end to the other; with this sign you will overthrow; with this
sign you will edify; _in hoc signo vinces!_” [9]

“Close the door,” continued the Franciscan after a pause. Aramis shut
and bolted the door, and returned to the side of the Franciscan.

“The pope is conspiring against the order,” said the monk; “the pope
must die.”

“He shall die,” said Aramis, quietly.

“Seven hundred thousand livres are owing to a Bremen merchant of the
name of Bonstett, who came here to get the guarantee of my signature.”

“He shall be paid,” said Aramis.

“Six knights of Malta, whose names are written here, have discovered,
by the indiscretion of one of the affiliated of the eleventh year, the
three mysteries; it must be ascertained what else these men have done
with the secret, to get it back again and bury it.”

“It shall be done.”

“Three dangerous affiliated members must be sent away into Tibet, there
to perish; they stand condemned. Here are their names.”

“I will see that the sentence be carried out.”

“Lastly, there is a lady at Anvers, grand-niece of Ravaillac; she holds
certain papers in her hands that compromise the order. There has been
payable to the family during the last fifty-one years a pension of
fifty thousand livres. The pension is a heavy one, and the order is not
wealthy. Redeem the papers, for a sum of money paid down, or, in case of
refusal, stop the pension--but run no risk.”

“I will quickly decide what is best to be done,” said Aramis.

“A vessel chartered from Lima entered the port of Lisbon last week;
ostensibly it is laden with chocolate, in reality with gold. Every ingot
is concealed by a coating of chocolate. The vessel belongs to the
order; it is worth seventeen millions of livres; you will see that it is
claimed; here are the bills of landing.”

“To what port shall I direct it to be taken?”

“To Bayonne.”

“Before three weeks are over it shall be there, wind and weather
permitting. Is that all?” The Franciscan made a sign in the affirmative,
for he could no longer speak; the blood rushed to his throat and his
head, and gushed from his mouth, his nostrils, and his eyes. The dying
man had barely time to press Aramis’s hand, when he fell in convulsions
from his bed upon the floor. Aramis placed his hand upon the
Franciscan’s heart, but it had ceased to beat. As he stooped down,
Aramis observed that a fragment of the paper he had given the Franciscan
had escaped being burnt. He picked it up, and burnt it to the last atom.
Then, summoning the confessor and the physician, he said to the former:
“Your penitent is in heaven; he needs nothing more than prayers and the
burial bestowed upon the pious dead. Go and prepare what is necessary
for a simple interment, such as a poor monk only would require. Go.”

The Jesuit left the room. Then, turning towards the physician, and
observing his pale and anxious face, he said, in a low tone of voice:
“Monsieur Grisart, empty and clean this glass; _there is too much left
in it of what the grand council desired you to put in_.”

Grisart, amazed, overcome, completely astounded, almost fell backwards
in his extreme terror. Aramis shrugged his shoulders in sign of pity,
took the glass, and poured out the contents among the ashes of the
hearth. He then left the room, carrying the papers of the dead man with
him.



Chapter LIV. A Mission.

The next day, or rather the same day (for the events we have just
described were concluded only at three o’clock in the morning), before
breakfast was served, and as the king was preparing to go to mass with
the two queens; as Monsieur, with the Chevalier de Lorraine, and a few
other intimate companions, was mounting his horse to set off for the
river, to take one of those celebrated baths with which the ladies
of the court were so infatuated, as, in fact, no one remained in
the chateau, with the exception of Madame who, under the pretext of
indisposition, would not leave her room; Montalais was seen, or rather
not was not seen, to glide stealthily out of the room appropriated to
the maids of honor, leading La Valliere after her, who tried to conceal
herself as much as possible, and both of them, hurrying secretly through
the gardens, succeeded, looking round them at every step they took, in
reaching the thicket. The weather was cloudy, a warm breeze bowed the
flowers and the shrubs, the burning dust, swept along in clouds by the
wind, was whirled in eddies towards the trees. Montalais, who, during
their progress, had discharged the functions of a clever scout, advanced
a few steps further, and turning round again, to be quite sure that no
one was either listening or approaching, said to her companion, “Thank
goodness, we are quite alone! Since yesterday every one spies on
us here, and a circle seems to be drawn round us, as if we were
plague-stricken.” La Valliere bent down her head and sighed. “It is
positively unheard of,” continued Montalais; “from M. Malicorne to M. de
Saint-Aignan, every one wishes to get hold of our secret. Come, Louise,
let us take counsel, you and I, together, in order that I may know what
to do.”

La Valliere lifted towards her companion her beautiful eyes, pure and
deep as the azure of a spring sky, “And I,” she said, “will ask you why
we have been summoned to Madame’s own room? Why have we slept close
to her apartment, instead of sleeping as usual in our own? Why did you
return so late, and whence are these measures of strict supervision
which have been adopted since this morning, with respect to us both?”

“My dear Louise, you answer my question by another, or rather, by ten
others, which is not answering me at all. I will tell you all you want
to know later, and as it is of secondary importance, you can wait. What
I ask you--for everything will depend upon that--is, whether there is or
is not any secret?”

“I do not know if there is any secret,” said La Valliere; “but I
do know, for my part at least, that there has been great imprudence
committed. Since the foolish remark I made, and my still more silly
fainting yesterday, every one here is making remarks about us.”

“Speak for yourself,” said Montalais, laughing, “speak for yourself and
for Tonnay-Charente; for both of you made your declarations of love to
the skies, which unfortunately were intercepted.”

La Valliere hung down her head. “Really you overwhelm me,” she said.

“I?”

“Yes, you torture me with your jests.”

“Listen to me, Louise. These are no jests, for nothing is more serious;
on the contrary, I did not drag you out of the chateau; I did not miss
attending mass; I did not pretend to have a cold, as Madame did, which
she has no more than I have; and, lastly, I did not display ten times
more diplomacy than M. Colbert inherited from M. de Mazarin, and makes
use of with respect to M. Fouquet, in order to find means of confiding
my perplexities to you, for the sole end and purpose that, when at
last we were alone, with no one to listen to us, you should deal
hypocritically with me. No, no; believe me, that when I ask you a
question, it is not from curiosity alone, but really because the
position is a critical one. What you said yesterday is now known,--it
is a text on which every one is discoursing. Every one embellishes it
to the utmost, and according to his own fancy; you had the honor last
night, and you have it still to-day, of occupying the whole court, my
dear Louise; and the number of tender and witty remarks which have been
ascribed to you, would make Mademoiselle de Scudery and her brother
burst from very spite, if they were faithfully reported.”

“But, dearest Montalais,” said the poor girl, “you know better than any
one exactly what I said, since you were present when I said it.”

“Yes, I know. But that is not the question. I have not forgotten a
single syllable you uttered, but did you think what you were saying?”

Louise became confused. “What,” she exclaimed, “more questions still!
Oh, heavens! when I would give the world to forget what I did say, how
does it happen that every one does all he possibly can to remind me of
it? Oh, this is indeed terrible!”

“What is?”

“To have a friend who ought to spare me, who might advise me and help me
to save myself, and yet who is undoing me--is killing me.”

“There, there, that will do,” said Montalais; “after having said too
little, you now say too much. No one thinks of killing you, nor even of
robbing you, even of your secret; I wish to have it voluntarily, and in
no other way; for the question does not concern your own affairs only,
but ours also; and Tonnay-Charente would tell you as I do, if she
were here. For, the fact is, that last evening she wished to have
some private conversation in our room, and I was going there after the
Manicamp and Malicorne colloquies terminated, when I learned, on my
return, rather late, it is true, that Madame had sequestered her maids
of honor, and that we were to sleep in her apartments, instead of our
own. Moreover, Madame has shut up her maids of honor in order that they
should not have the time to concert any measures together, and this
morning she was closeted with Tonnay-Charente with the same object. Tell
me, then, to what extent Athenais and I can rely upon you, as we will
tell you in what way you can rely upon us?”

“I do not clearly understand the question you have put,” said Louise,
much agitated.

“Hum! and yet, on the contrary, you seem to understand me very well.
However, I will put my questions in a more precise manner, in order that
you may not be able, in the slightest degree, to evade them. Listen to
me: _Do you love M. de Bragelonne?_ That is plain enough, is it not?”

At this question, which fell like the first bombshell of a besieging
army into a doomed town, Louise started. “You ask me,” she exclaimed,
“if I love Raoul, the friend of my childhood,--my brother almost?”

“No, no, no! Again you evade me, or rather, you wish to escape me. I do
not ask if you love Raoul, your childhood’s friend,--your brother; but I
ask if you love the Vicomte de Bragelonne, your affianced husband?”

“Good heavens! dear Montalais,” said Louise, “how severe your tone is!”

“You deserve no indulgence,--I am neither more nor less severe than
usual. I put a question to you, so answer it.”

“You certainly do not,” said Louise, in a choking voice, “speak to me
like a friend; but I will answer you as a true friend.”

“Well, do so.”

“Very well; my heart is full of scruples and silly feelings of pride,
with respect to everything that a woman ought to keep secret, and in
this respect no one has ever read into the bottom of my soul.”

“That I know very well. If I had read it, I should not interrogate you
as I have done; I should simply say,--‘My good Louise, you have the
happiness of an acquaintance with M. de Bragelonne, who is an excellent
young man, and an advantageous match for a girl without fortune. M. de
la Fere will leave something like fifteen thousand livres a year to his
son. At a future day, then, you, as this son’s wife, will have fifteen
thousand livres a year; which is not bad. Turn, then, neither to the
right hand nor to the left, but go frankly to M. de Bragelonne; that
is to say, to the altar to which he will lead you. Afterwards, why--
afterwards, according to his disposition, you will be emancipated or
enslaved; in other words, you will have a right to commit any piece of
folly people commit who have either too much liberty or too little.’
That is, my dear Louise, what I should have told you at first, if I had
been able to read your heart.”

“And I should have thanked you,” stammered out Louise, “although the
advice does not appear to me to be altogether sound.”

“Wait, wait. But immediately after having given you that advice, I
should have added,--‘Louise, it is very dangerous to pass whole days
with your head drooping, your hands unoccupied, your eyes restless and
full of thought; it is dangerous to prefer the least frequented paths,
and no longer be amused with such diversions as gladden young girls’
hearts; it is dangerous, Louise, to scrawl with the point of your foot,
as you do, upon the gravel, certain letters it is useless for you to
efface, but which appear again under your heel, particularly when those
letters rather resemble the letter L than the letter B; and, lastly, it
is dangerous to allow the mind to dwell on a thousand wild fancies, the
fruits of solitude and heartache; these fancies, while they sink into
a young girl’s mind, make her cheeks sink in also, so that it is not
unusual, on such occasions, to find the most delightful persons in
the world become the most disagreeable, and the wittiest to become the
dullest.’”

“I thank you, dearest Aure,” replied La Valliere, gently; “it is like
you to speak to me in this manner, and I thank you for it.”

“It was only for the benefit of wild dreamers, such as I have just
described, that I spoke; do not take any of my words, then, to yourself,
except such as you think you deserve. Stay, I hardly know what story
recurs to my memory of some silly or melancholy girl, who was gradually
pining away because she fancied that the prince, or the king, or the
emperor, whoever it was--and it does not matter much which--had fallen
in love with her; while on the contrary, the prince, or the king, or the
emperor, whichever you please, was plainly in love with some one else,
and--a singular circumstance, one, indeed, which she could not perceive,
although every one around and about her perceived it clearly enough--
made use of her as a screen for his own love affair. You laugh as I do,
at this poor silly girl, do you not, Louise?”

“I?--oh! of course,” stammered Louise, pale as death.

“And you are right, too, for the thing is amusing enough. The story,
whether true or false, amused me, and so I remembered it and told it
to you. Just imagine then, my good Louise, the mischief that such a
melancholy would create in anybody’s brain,--a melancholy, I mean, of
that kind. For my own part, I resolved to tell you the story; for
if such a thing were to happen to either of _us_, it would be most
essential to be assured of its truth; to-day it is a snare, to-morrow
it would become a jest and mockery, the next day it would mean death
itself.” La Valliere started again, and became, if possible, still
paler.

“Whenever a king takes notice of us,” continued Montalais, “he lets us
see it easily enough, and, if we happen to be the object he covets, he
knows very well how to gain his object. You see, then, Louise, that, in
such circumstances, between young girls exposed to such a danger as the
one in question, the most perfect confidence should exist, in order that
those hearts which are not disposed towards melancholy may watch over
those likely to become so.”

“Silence, silence!” said La Valliere; “some one approaches.”

“Some one is approaching fast, in fact,” said Montalais; “but who can it
possibly be? Everybody is away, either at mass with the king, or bathing
with Monsieur.”

At the end of the walk the young girls perceived almost immediately,
beneath the arching trees, the graceful carriage and noble stature of a
young man, who, with his sword under his arm and a cloak thrown across
his shoulders, booted and spurred besides, saluted them from the
distance with a gentle smile. “Raoul!” exclaimed Montalais.

“M. de Bragelonne!” murmured Louise.

“A very proper judge to decide upon our difference of opinion,” said
Montalais.

“Oh! Montalais, Montalais, for pity’s sake,” exclaimed La Valliere,
“after having been so cruel, show me a little mercy.” These words,
uttered with all the fervor of a prayer, effaced all trace of irony, if
not from Montalais’s heart, at least from her face.

“Why, you are as handsome as Amadis, Monsieur de Bragelonne,” she cried
to Raoul, “and armed and booted like him.”

“A thousand compliments, young ladies,” replied Raoul, bowing.

“But why, I ask, are you booted in this manner?” repeated Montalais,
whilst La Valliere, although she looked at Raoul with a surprise equal
to that of her companion, nevertheless uttered not a word.

“Why?” inquired Raoul.

“Yes!” ventured Louise.

“Because I am about to set off,” said Bragelonne, looking at Louise.

The young girl seemed as though smitten by some superstitious feeling of
terror, and tottered. “You are going away, Raoul!” she cried; “and where
are you going?”

“Dearest Louise,” he replied, with that quiet, composed manner which was
natural to him, “I am going to England.”

“What are you going to do in England?”

“The king has sent me there.”

“The king!” exclaimed Louise and Aure together, involuntarily exchanging
glances, the conversation which had just been interrupted recurring to
them both. Raoul intercepted the glance, but could not understand its
meaning, and, naturally enough, attributed it to the interest both the
young girls took in him.

“His majesty,” he said, “has been good enough to remember that the Comte
de la Fere is high in favor with King Charles II. This morning, as he
was on his way to attend mass, the king, seeing me as he passed, signed
to me to approach, which I accordingly did. ‘Monsieur de Bragelonne,’
he said to me, ‘you will call upon M. Fouquet, who has received from me
letters for the king of Great Britain; you will be the bearer of them.’
I bowed. ‘Ah!’ his majesty added, ‘before you leave, you will be good
enough to take any commissions which Madame may have for the king her
brother.’”

“Gracious heaven!” murmured Louise, much agitated, and yet full of
thought at the same time.

“So quickly! You are desired to set off in such haste!” said Montalais,
almost paralyzed by this unforeseen event.

“Properly to obey those whom we respect,” said Raoul, “it is necessary
to obey quickly. Within ten minutes after I had received the order, I
was ready. Madame, already informed, is writing the letter which she
is good enough to do me the honor of intrusting to me. In the meantime,
learning from Mademoiselle de Tonnay-Charente that it was likely you
would be in this direction, I came here, and am happy to find you both.”

“And both of us very sad, as you see,” said Montalais, going to Louise’s
assistance, whose countenance was visibly altered.

“Suffering?” responded Raoul, pressing Louise’s hand with a tender
curiosity. “Your hand is like ice.”

“It is nothing.”

“This coldness does not reach your heart, Louise, does it?” inquired the
young man, with a tender smile. Louise raised her head hastily, as if
the question had been inspired by some suspicion, and had aroused a
feeling of remorse.

“Oh! you know,” she said, with an effort, “that my heart will never be
cold towards a friend like yourself, Monsieur de Bragelonne.”

“Thank you, Louise. I know both your heart and your mind; it is not by
the touch of the hand that one can judge of an affection like yours. You
know, Louise, how devotedly I love you, with what perfect and unreserved
confidence I reserve my life for you; will you not forgive me, then, for
speaking to you with something like the frankness of a child?”

“Speak, Monsieur Raoul,” said Louise, trembling painfully, “I am
listening.”

“I cannot part from you, carrying away with me a thought that tortures
me; absurd I know it to be, and yet one which rends my very heart.”

“Are you going away, then, for any length of time?” inquired La
Valliere, with faltering utterance, while Montalais turned her head
aside.

“No; probably I shall not be absent more than a fortnight.” La Valliere
pressed her hand upon her heart, which felt as though it were breaking.

“It is strange,” pursued Raoul, looking at the young girl with a
melancholy expression; “I have often left you when setting off on
adventures fraught with danger. Then I started joyously enough--my heart
free, my mind intoxicated by thoughts of happiness in store for me,
hopes of which the future was full; and yet I was about to face the
Spanish cannon, or the halberds of the Walloons. To-day, without the
existence of any danger or uneasiness, and by the sunniest path in the
world, I am going in search of a glorious recompense, which this mark
of the king’s favor seems to indicate, for I am, perhaps, going to win
_you_, Louise. What other favor, more precious than yourself, could the
king confer upon me? Yet, Louise, in very truth I know not how or why,
but this happiness and this future seem to vanish before my very eyes
like mist--like an idle dream; and I feel here, here at the very bottom
of my heart, a deep-seated grief, a dejection I cannot overcome--
something heavy, passionless, death-like,--resembling a corpse. Oh!
Louise, too well do I know why; it is because I have never loved you so
truly as now. God help me!”

At this last exclamation, which issued as it were from a broken heart,
Louise burst into tears, and threw herself into Montalais’s arms. The
latter, although she was not easily moved, felt the tears rush to her
eyes. Raoul noted only the tears Louise shed; his look, however, did not
penetrate--nay, sought not to penetrate--beyond those tears. He bent his
knee before her, and tenderly kissed her hand; and it was evident that
in that kiss he poured out his whole heart.

“Rise, rise,” said Montalais to him, ready to cry, “for Athenais is
coming.”

Raoul rose, brushed his knee with the back of his hand, smiled again
upon Louise, whose eyes were fixed on the ground, and, having pressed
Montalais’s hand gratefully, he turned round to salute Mademoiselle de
Tonnay-Charente, the sound of whose silken robe was already heard upon
the gravel walk. “Has Madame finished her letter?” he inquired, when the
young girl came within reach of his voice.

“Yes, the letter is finished, sealed, and her royal highness is ready to
receive you.”

Raoul, at this remark, hardly gave himself time to salute Athenais, cast
one look at Louise, bowed to Montalais, and withdrew in the direction of
the chateau. As he withdrew he again turned round, but at last, at the
end of the grand walk, it was useless to do so again, as he could no
longer see them. The three young girls, on their side, had, with widely
different feelings, watched him disappear.

“At last,” said Athenais, the first to interrupt the silence, “at last
we are alone, free to talk of yesterday’s great affair, and to come
to an understanding upon the conduct it is advisable for us to pursue.
Besides, if you will listen to me,” she continued, looking round on
all sides, “I will explain to you, as briefly as possible, in the first
place, our own duty, such as I imagine it to be, and, if you do
not understand a hint, what is Madame’s desire on the subject.” And
Mademoiselle de Tonnay-Charente pronounced these words in such a tone as
to leave no doubt, in her companion’s minds, upon the official character
with which she was invested.

“Madame’s desire!” exclaimed Montalais and La Valliere together.

“Her _ultimatum_,” replied Mademoiselle de Tonnay-Charente,
diplomatically.

“But,” murmured La Valliere, “does Madame know, then--”

“Madame knows more about the matter than we said, even,” said Athenais,
in a formal, precise manner. “Therefore let us come to a proper
understanding.”

“Yes, indeed,” said Montalais, “and I am listening in breathless
attention.”

“Gracious heavens!” murmured Louise, trembling, “shall I ever survive
this cruel evening?”

“Oh! do not frighten yourself in that manner,” said Athenais; “we have
found a remedy.” So, seating herself between her two companions, and
taking each of them by the hand, which she held in her own, she began.
The first words were hardly spoke, when they heard a horse galloping
away over the stones of the public high-road, outside the gates of the
chateau.



Chapter LV. Happy as a Prince.

At the very moment he was about entering the chateau, Bragelonne met De
Guiche. But before having been met by Raoul, De Guiche had met Manicamp,
who had met Malicorne. How was it that Malicorne had met Manicamp?
Nothing more simple, for he had awaited his return from mass, where he
had accompanied M. de Saint-Aignan. When they met, they congratulated
each other upon their good fortune, and Manicamp availed himself of
the circumstance to ask his friend if he had not a few crowns still
remaining at the bottom of his pocket. The latter, without expressing
any surprise at the question, which he perhaps expected, answered that
every pocket which is always being drawn upon without anything ever
being put in it, resembles those wells which supply water during the
winter, but which gardeners render useless by exhausting during the
summer; that his, Malicorne’s, pocket certainly was deep, and that
there would be a pleasure in drawing on it in times of plenty, but that,
unhappily, abuse had produced barrenness. To this remark, Manicamp, deep
in thought, had replied, “Quite true!”

“The question, then, is how to fill it?” Malicorne added.

“Of course; but in what way?”

“Nothing easier, my dear Monsieur Manicamp.”

“So much the better. How?”

“A post in Monsieur’s household, and the pocket is full again.”

“You have the post?”

“That is, I have the promise of being nominated.”

“Well!”

“Yes; but the promise of nomination, without the post itself, is like a
purse with no money in it.”

“Quite true,” Manicamp replied a second time.

“Let us try for the post, then,” the candidate had persisted.

“My dear fellow,” sighed Manicamp, “an appointment in his royal
highness’s household is one of the gravest difficulties of our
position.”

“Oh! oh!”

“There is no question that, at the present moment, we cannot ask
Monsieur for anything.”

“Why so?” “Because we are not on good terms with him.”

“A great absurdity, too,” said Malicorne, promptly.

“Bah! and if we were to show Madame any attention,” said Manicamp,
“frankly speaking, do you think we should please Monsieur?”

“Precisely; if we show Madame any attention, and do it adroitly,
Monsieur ought to adore us.”

“Hum!”

“Either that or we are great fools. Make haste, therefore, M. Manicamp,
you who are so able a politician, and make M. de Guiche and his royal
highness friendly again.”

“Tell me, what did M. de Saint-Aignan tell you, Malicorne?”

“Tell me? nothing; he asked me several questions, and that was all.”

“Well, was he less discreet, then, with me.”

“What did he tell you?”

“That the king is passionately in love with Mademoiselle de la
Valliere.”

“We knew that already,” replied Malicorne, ironically; “and everybody
talks about it loud enough for all to know it; but in the meantime, do
what I advise you; speak to M. de Guiche, and endeavor to get him to
make advances to Monsieur. Deuce take it! he owes his royal highness
that, at least.”

“But we must see De Guiche, then?”

“There does not seem to be any great difficulty in that; try to see him
in the same way I tried to see you; wait for him; you know that he is
naturally very fond of walking.”

“Yes; but whereabouts does he walk?”

“What a question to ask! Do you not know that he is in love with
Madame?”

“So it is said.”

“Very well; you will find him walking about on the side of the chateau
where her apartments are.”

“Stay, my dear Malicorne, you were not mistaken, for here he is coming.”

“Why should I be mistaken? Have you ever noticed that I am in the habit
of making a mistake? Come, we only need to understand each other. Are
you in want of money?”

“Ah!” exclaimed Manicamp, mournfully.

“Well, I want my appointment. Let Malicorne have the appointment, and
Manicamp shall have the money. There is no greater difficulty in the way
than that.”

“Very well; in that case make yourself easy. I will do my best.”

“Do.”

De Guiche approached, Malicorne stepped aside, and Manicamp caught
hold of De Guiche, who was thoughtful and melancholy. “Tell me, my dear
comte, what rhyme you were trying to find,” said Manicamp. “I have an
excellent one to match yours, particularly if yours ends in _ame_.”

De Guiche shook his head, and recognizing a friend, he took him by the
arm. “My dear Manicamp,” he said, “I am in search of something very
different from a rhyme.”

“What is it you are looking for?”

“You will help me to find what I am in search of,” continued the comte:
“you who are such an idle fellow, in other words, a man with a mind full
of ingenious devices.”

“I am getting my ingenuity ready, then, my dear comte.”

“This is the state of the case, then: I wish to approach a particular
house, where I have some business.”

“You must get near the house, then,” said Manicamp.

“Very good; but in this house dwells a husband who happens to be
jealous.”

“Is he more jealous than the dog Cerberus?”

“Not more, but quite as much so.”

“Has he three mouths, as that obdurate guardian of the infernal regions
had? Do not shrug your shoulders, my dear comte: I put the question
to you with an excellent reason, since poets pretend that, in order to
soften Monsieur Cerberus, the visitor must take something enticing
with him--a cake, for instance. Therefore, I, who view the matter in a
prosaic light, that is to say in the light of reality, I say: one cake
is very little for three mouths. If your jealous husband has three
mouths, comte, get three cakes.”

“Manicamp, I can get such advice as that from M. de Beautru.”

“In order to get better advice,” said Manicamp, with a comical
seriousness of expression, “you will be obliged to adopt a more precise
formula than you have used towards me.”

“If Raoul were here,” said De Guiche, “he would be sure to understand
me.”

“So I think, particularly if you said to him: ‘I should very much
like to see Madame a little nearer, but I fear Monsieur, because he is
jealous.’”

“Manicamp!” cried the comte, angrily, and endeavoring to overwhelm his
tormentor by a look, who did not, however, appear to be in the slightest
degree disturbed by it.

“What is the matter now, my dear comte?” inquired Manicamp.

“What! is it thus you blaspheme the most sacred of names?”

“What names?”

“Monsieur! Madame! the highest names in the kingdom.”

“You are very strangely mistaken, my dear comte. I never mentioned the
highest names in the kingdom. I merely answered you in reference to the
subject of a jealous husband, whose name you did not tell me, and who,
as a matter of course, has a wife. I therefore replied to you, in order
to see Madame, you must get a little more intimate with Monsieur.”

“Double-dealer that you are,” said the comte, smiling; “was that what
you said?”

“Nothing else.”

“Very good; what then?”

“Now,” added Manicamp, “let the question be regarding the Duchess--or
the Duke--; very well, I shall say: Let us get into the house in
some way or other, for that is a tactic which cannot in any case be
unfavorable to your love affair.”

“Ah! Manicamp, if you could but find me a pretext, a good pretext.”

“A pretext; I can find you a hundred, nay, a thousand. If Malicorne were
here, he would have already hit upon a thousand excellent pretexts.”

“Who is Malicorne?” replied De Guiche, half-shutting his eyes, like a
person reflecting, “I seem to know the name.”

“Know him! I should think so: you owe his father thirty thousand
crowns.”

“Ah, indeed! so it’s that worthy fellow from Orleans.”

“Whom you promised an appointment in Monsieur’s household; not the
jealous husband, but the other.”

“Well, then, since your friend Malicorne is such an inventive genius,
let him find me a means of being adored by Monsieur, and a pretext to
make my peace with him.”

“Very good: I’ll talk to him about it.”

“But who is that coming?”

“The Vicomte de Bragelonne.”

“Raoul! yes, it is he,” said De Guiche, as he hastened forward to meet
him. “You here, Raoul?” said De Guiche.

“Yes: I was looking for you to say farewell,” replied Raoul, warmly,
pressing the comte’s hand. “How do you do, Monsieur Manicamp?”

“How is this, vicomte, you are leaving us?”

“Yes, a mission from the king.”

“Where are you going?”

“To London. On leaving you, I am going to Madame; she has a letter to
give me for his majesty, Charles II.”


“You will find her alone, for Monsieur has gone out; gone to bathe, in
fact.”

“In that case, you, who are one of Monsieur’s gentlemen in waiting, will
undertake to make my excuses to him. I would have waited in order to
receive any directions he might have to give me, if the desire for my
immediate departure had not been intimated to me by M. Fouquet on behalf
of his majesty.”

Manicamp touched De Guiche’s elbow, saying, “There’s a pretext for you.”

“What?”

“M. de Bragelonne’s excuses.”

“A weak pretext,” said De Guiche.

“An excellent one, if Monsieur is not angry with you; but a paltry one
if he bears you ill-will.”

“You are right, Manicamp; a pretext, however poor it may be, is all I
require. And so, a pleasant journey to you, Raoul!” And the two friends
took a warm leave of each other.

Five minutes afterwards Raoul entered Madame’s apartments, as
Mademoiselle de Montalais had begged him to do. Madame was still seated
at the table where she had written her letter. Before her was still
burning the rose-colored taper she had used to seal it. Only in her deep
reflection, for Madame seemed to be buried in thought, she had forgotten
to extinguish the light. Bragelonne was a very model of elegance in
every way; it was impossible to see him once without always remembering
him; and not only had Madame seen him once, but it will not be
forgotten he was one of the very first who had gone to meet her, and had
accompanied her from Le Havre to Paris. Madame preserved therefore an
excellent recollection of him.

“Ah! M. de Bragelonne,” she said to him, “you are going to see my
brother, who will be delighted to pay to the son a portion of the debt
of gratitude he contracted with the father.”

“The Comte de la Fere, Madame, has been abundantly recompensed for the
little service he had the happiness to render the king, by the kindness
manifested towards him, and it is I who will have to convey to his
majesty the assurance of the respect, devotion, and gratitude of both
father and son.”

“Do you know my brother?”

“No, your highness; I shall have the honor of seeing his majesty for the
first time.”

“You require no recommendation to him. At all events, however, if you
have any doubt about your personal merit, take me unhesitatingly for
your surety.”

“Your royal highness overwhelms me with kindness.”

“No! M. de Bragelonne, I well remember that we were fellow-travelers
once, and that I remarked your extreme prudence in the midst of the
extravagant absurdities committed, on both sides, by two of the greatest
simpletons in the world,--M. de Guiche and the Duke of Buckingham. Let
us not speak of them, however; but of yourself. Are you going to England
to remain there permanently? Forgive my inquiry: it is not curiosity,
but a desire to be of service to you in anything I can.”

“No, Madame; I am going to England to fulfil a mission which his majesty
has been kind enough to confide to me--nothing more.”

“And you propose to return to France?”

“As soon as I have accomplished my mission; unless, indeed, his majesty,
King Charles II., should have other orders for me.”

“He well beg you, at the very least, I am sure, to remain near him as
long as possible.”

“In that case, as I shall not know how to refuse, I will now beforehand
entreat your royal highness to have the goodness to remind the king of
France that one of his devoted servants is far away from him.”

“Take care that when you _are_ recalled, you do not consider his command
an abuse of power.”

“I do not understand you, Madame.”

“The court of France is not easily matched, I am aware, but yet we have
some pretty women at the court of England also.”

Raoul smiled.

“Oh!” said Madame, “yours is a smile which portends no good to my
countrywomen. It is as though you were telling them, Monsieur de
Bragelonne: ‘I visit you, but I leave my heart on the other side of the
Channel.’ Did not your smile indicate that?”

“Your highness is gifted with the power of reading the inmost depths
of the soul, and you will understand, therefore, why, at present, any
prolonged residence at the court of England would be a matter of the
deepest regret.”

“And I need not inquire if so gallant a knight is recompensed in
return?”

“I have been brought up, Madame, with her whom I love, and I believe our
affection is mutual.”

“In that case, do not delay your departure, Monsieur de Bragelonne,
and delay not your return, for on your return we shall see two persons
happy; for I hope no obstacle exists to your felicity.”

“There is a great obstacle, Madame.”

“Indeed! what is it?”

“The king’s wishes on the subject.”

“The king opposes your marriage?”

“He postpones it, at least. I solicited his majesty’s consent through
the Comte de la Fere, and, without absolutely refusing it, he positively
said it must be deferred.”

“Is the young lady whom you love unworthy of you, then?”

“She is worthy of a king’s affection, Madame.”

“I mean, she is not, perhaps, of birth equal to your own.”

“Her family is excellent.”

“Is she young, beautiful?”

“She is seventeen, and, in my opinion, exceedingly beautiful.”

“Is she in the country, or at Paris?”

“She is here at Fontainebleau, Madame.”

“At the court?”

“Yes.”

“Do I know her?”

“She has the honor to form one of your highness’s household.”

“Her name?” inquired the princess, anxiously; “if indeed,” she added,
hastily, “her name is not a secret.”

“No, Madame, my affection is too pure for me to make a secret of it to
any one, and with still greater reason to your royal highness, whose
kindness towards me has been so extreme. It is Mademoiselle Louise de la
Valliere.”

Madame could not restrain an exclamation, in which a feeling
stronger than surprise might have been detected. “Ah!” she said, “La
Valliere--she who yesterday--” she paused, and then continued, “she who
was taken ill, I believe.”

“Yes, Madame; it was only this morning that I heard of the accident that
had befallen her.”

“Did you see her before you came to me?”

“I had the honor of taking leave of her.”

“And you say,” resumed Madame, making a powerful effort over herself,
“that the king has--deferred your marriage with this young girl.”

“Yes, Madame, deferred it.”

“Did he assign any reason for this postponement?”

“None.”

“How long is it since the Comte de la Fere preferred his request to the
king?”

“More than a month, Madame.”

“It is very singular,” said the princess, as something like a film
clouded her eyes.

“A month?” she repeated.

“About a month.”

“You are right, vicomte,” said the princess, with a smile, in which De
Bragelonne might have remarked a kind of restraint; “my brother must not
keep you too long in England; set off at once, and in the first letter I
write to England, I will claim you in the king’s name.” And Madame rose
to place her letter in Bragelonne’s hands. Raoul understood that his
audience was at an end; he took the letter, bowed lowly to the princess,
and left the room.

“A month!” murmured the princess; “could I have been blind, then, to so
great an extent, and could he have loved her for this last month?”
 And as Madame had nothing to do, she sat down to begin a letter to her
brother, the postscript of which was a summons for Bragelonne to return.

The Comte de Guiche, as we have seen, had yielded to the pressing
persuasions of Manicamp, and allowed himself to be led to the stables,
where they desired their horses to be got ready for them; then, by one
of the side paths, a description of which has already been given,
they advanced to meet Monsieur, who, having just finished bathing, was
returning towards the chateau, wearing a woman’s veil to protect his
face from getting burnt by the sun, which was shining very brightly.
Monsieur was in one of those fits of good humor to which the admiration
of his own good looks sometimes gave occasion. As he was bathing he
had been able to compare the whiteness of his body with that of the
courtiers, and, thanks to the care which his royal highness took of
himself, no one, not even the Chevalier de Lorraine, was able to stand
the comparison. Monsieur, moreover, had been tolerably successful in
swimming, and his muscles having been exercised by the healthy immersion
in the cool water, he was in a light and cheerful state of mind and
body. So that, at the sight of Guiche, who advanced to meet him at a
hand gallop, mounted upon a magnificent white horse, the prince could
not restrain an exclamation of delight.

“I think matters look well,” said Manicamp, who fancied he could read
this friendly disposition upon his royal highness’s countenance.

“Good day, De Guiche, good day,” exclaimed the prince.

“Long life to your royal highness!” replied De Guiche, encouraged by the
tone of Philip’s voice; “health, joy, happiness, and prosperity to your
highness.”

“Welcome, De Guiche, come on my right side, but keep your horse in hand,
for I wish to return at a walking pace under the cool shade of these
trees.”

“As you please, monseigneur,” said De Guiche, taking his place on the
prince’s right as he had been invited to do.

“Now, my dear De Guiche,” said the prince, “give me a little news
of that De Guiche whom I used to know formerly, and who used to pay
attentions to my wife.”

Guiche blushed to the very whites of his eyes, while Monsieur burst out
laughing, as though he had made the wittiest remark in the world. The
few privileged courtiers who surrounded Monsieur thought it their duty
to follow his example, although they had not heard the remark, and a
noisy burst of laughter immediately followed, beginning with the first
courtier, passing on through the whole company, and only terminating
with the last. De Guiche, although blushing scarlet, put a good
countenance on the matter; Manicamp looked at him.

“Ah! monseigneur,” replied De Guiche, “show a little charity towards
such a miserable fellow as I am: do not hold me up to the ridicule of
the Chevalier de Lorraine.”

“How do you mean?”

“If he hears you ridicule me, he will go beyond your highness, and will
show no pity.”

“About your passion and the princess, do you mean?”

“For mercy’s sake, monseigneur.”

“Come, come, De Guiche, confess that you _did_ get a little sweet upon
Madame.”

“I will never confess such a thing, monseigneur.”

“Out of respect for me, I suppose; but I release you from your respect,
De Guiche. Confess, as if it were simply a question about Mademoiselle
de Chalais or Mademoiselle de la Valliere.”

Then breaking off, he said, beginning to laugh again, “Comte, that
wasn’t at all bad!--a remark like a sword, which cuts two ways at once.
I hit you and my brother at the same time, Chalais and La Valliere, your
affianced bride and his future lady love.”

“Really, monseigneur,” said the comte, “you are in a most brilliant humor
to-day.”

“The fact is, I feel well, and then I am pleased to see you again. But
you were angry with me, were you not?”

“I, monseigneur? Why should I have been so?”

“Because I interfered with your sarabands and your other Spanish
amusements. Nay, do not deny it. On that day you left the princess’s
apartments with your eyes full of fury; that brought you ill-luck, for
you danced in the ballet yesterday in a most wretched manner. Now don’t
get sulky, De Guiche, for it does you no good, but makes you look like a
tame bear. If the princess did not look at you attentively yesterday, I
am quite sure of one thing.”

“What is that, monseigneur? Your highness alarms me.”

“She has quite forsworn you now,” said the prince, with a burst of loud
laughter.

“Decidedly,” thought Manicamp, “rank has nothing to do with it, and all
men are alike.”

The prince continued: “At all events, you have now returned, and it is
to be hoped that the chevalier will become amiable again.”

“How so, monseigneur: and by what miracle can I exercise such an
influence over M. de Lorraine?”

“The matter is very simple, he is jealous of you.”

“Bah! it is not possible.”

“It is the case, though.”

“He does me too much honor.”

“The fact is, that when you are here, he is full of kindness and
attention, but when you are gone he makes me suffer a perfect martyrdom.
I am like a see-saw. Besides, you do not know the idea that has struck
me?”

“I do not even suspect it.”

“Well, then; when you were in exile--for you really were exiled, my poor
De Guiche--”

“I should think so, indeed; but whose fault was it?” said De Guiche,
pretending to speak in an angry tone.

“Not mine, certainly, my dear comte,” replied his royal highness, “upon
my honor, I did not ask for the king to exile you--”

“No, not you, monseigneur, I am well aware; but--”

“But Madame; well, as far as that goes, I do not say it was not the
case. Why, what the deuce did you do or say to Madame?”

“Really, monseigneur--”

“Women, I know, have their grudges, and my wife is not free from
caprices of that nature. But if she were the cause of your being exiled
I bear you no ill-will.”

“In that case, monseigneur,” said De Guiche. “I am not altogether
unhappy.”

Manicamp, who was following closely behind De Guiche and who did
not lose a word of what the prince was saying, bent down to his very
shoulders over his horse’s neck, in order to conceal the laughter he
could not repress.

“Besides, your exile started a project in my head.”

“Good.”

“When the chevalier--finding you were no longer here, and sure of
reigning undisturbed--began to bully me, I, observing that my wife, in
the most perfect contrast to him, was most kind and amiable towards me
who had neglected her so much, the idea occurred to me of becoming a
model husband--a rarity, a curiosity, at the court; and I had an idea of
getting very fond of my wife.”

De Guiche looked at the prince with a stupefied expression of
countenance, which was not assumed.

“Oh! monseigneur,” De Guiche stammered out; “surely, that never
seriously occurred to you.”

“Indeed it did. I have some property that my brother gave me on my
marriage; she has some money of her own, and not a little either, for
she gets money from her brother and brother-in-law of England and France
at the same time. Well! we should have left the court. I should have
retired to my chateau at Villers-Cotterets, situated in the middle of a
forest, in which we should have led a most sentimental life in the
very same spot where my grandfather, Henry IV., sojourned with La Belle
Gabrielle. What do you think of that idea, De Guiche?”

“Why, it is enough to make one shiver, monseigneur,” replied De Guiche,
who shuddered in reality.

“Ah! I see you would never be able to endure being exiled a second
time.”

“I, monseigneur?”

“I will not carry you off with us, as I had first intended.”

“What, with you, monseigneur?”

“Yes; if the idea should occur to me again of taking a dislike to the
court.”

“Oh! do not let that make any difference, monseigneur; I would follow
your highness to the end of the world.”

“Clumsy fellow that you are!” said Manicamp, grumblingly, pushing his
horse towards De Guiche, so as almost to unseat him, and then, as
he passed close to him, as if he had lost command over the horse, he
whispered, “For goodness’ sake, think what you are saying.”

“Well, it is agreed, then,” said the prince; “since you are so devoted
to me, I shall take you with me.”

“Anywhere, monseigneur,” replied De Guiche in a joyous tone, “whenever
you like, and at once, too. Are you ready?”

And De Guiche, laughingly, gave his horse the rein, and galloped forward
a few yards.

“One moment,” said the prince. “Let us go to the chateau first.”

“What for?”

“Why, to take my wife, of course.”

“What for?” asked De Guiche.

“Why, since I tell you that it is a project of conjugal affection, it is
necessary I should take my wife with me.”

“In that case, monseigneur,” replied the comte, “I am greatly concerned,
but no De Guiche for you.”

“Bah!”

“Yes.--Why do you take Madame with you?”

“Because I begin to fancy I love her,” said the prince.

De Guiche turned slightly pale, but endeavored to preserve his seeming
cheerfulness.

“If you love Madame, monseigneur,” he said, “that ought to be quite
enough for you, and you have no further need of your friends.”

“Not bad, not bad,” murmured Manicamp.

“There, your fear of Madame has begun again,” replied the prince.

“Why, monseigneur, I have experienced that to my cost; a woman who was
the cause of my being exiled!”

“What a revengeful disposition you have, De Guiche, how virulently you
bear malice.”

“I should like the case to be your own, monseigneur.”

“Decidedly, then, that was the reason why you danced so badly yesterday;
you wished to revenge yourself, I suppose, by trying to make Madame make
a mistake in her dancing; ah! that is very paltry, De Guiche, and I will
tell Madame of it.”

“You may tell her whatever you please, monseigneur, for her highness
cannot hate me more than she does.”

“Nonsense, you are exaggerating; and this because merely of the
fortnight’s sojourn in the country she imposed on you.”

“Monseigneur, a fortnight is a fortnight; and when the time is passed in
getting sick and tired of everything, a fortnight is an eternity.”

“So that you will not forgive her?”

“Never!”

“Come, come, De Guiche, be a better disposed fellow than that. I wish
to make your peace with her; you will find, in conversing with her,
that she has no malice or unkindness in her nature, and that she is very
talented.”

“Monseigneur--”

“You will see that she can receive her friends like a princess, and
laugh like a citizen’s wife; you will see that, when she pleases, she
can make the pleasant hours pass like minutes. Come, De Guiche, you must
really make up your differences with my wife.”

“Upon my word,” said Manicamp to himself, “the prince is a husband whose
wife’s name will bring him ill-luck, and King Candaules, of old, was a
tiger beside his royal highness.”

“At all events,” added the prince, “I am sure you will make it up with
my wife: I guarantee you will do so. Only, I must show you the way now.
There is nothing commonplace about her: it is not every one who takes
her fancy.”

“Monseigneur--”

“No resistance, De Guiche, or I shall get out of temper,” replied the
prince.

“Well, since he will have it so,” murmured Manicamp, in Guiche’s ear,
“do as he wants you to do.”

“Well, monseigneur,” said the comte, “I obey.”

“And to begin,” resumed the prince, “there will be cards, this evening,
in Madame’s apartment; you will dine with me, and I will take you there
with me.”

“Oh! as for that, monseigneur,” objected De Guiche, “you will allow me
to object.”

“What, again! this is positive rebellion.”

“Madame received me too indifferently, yesterday, before the whole
court.”

“Really!” said the prince, laughing.

“Nay, so much so, indeed, that she did not even answer me when I
addressed her; it may be a good thing to have no self-respect at all,
but to have too little is not enough, as the saying is.”

“Comte! after dinner, you will go to your own apartments and dress
yourself, and then you will come to fetch me. I shall wait for you.”

“Since your highness absolutely commands it.”

“Positively.”

“He will not lose his hold,” said Manicamp; “these are the things to
which husbands cling most obstinately. Ah! what a pity M. Moliere could
not have heard this man; he would have turned him into verse if he had.”

The prince and his court, chatting in this manner, returned to the
coolest apartments of the chateau.

“By the by,” said De Guiche, as they were standing by the door, “I had a
commission for your royal highness.”

“Execute it, then.”

“M. de Bragelonne has, by the king’s order, set off for London, and he
charged me with his respects for you; monseigneur.”

“A pleasant journey to the vicomte, whom I like very much. Go and dress
yourself, De Guiche, and come back for me. If you don’t come back--”

“What will happen, monseigneur?”

“I will have you sent to the Bastile.”

“Well,” said De Guiche, laughing, “his royal highness, monseigneur, is
decidedly the counterpart of her royal highness, Madame. Madame gets
me sent into exile, because she does not care for me sufficiently; and
monseigneur gets me imprisoned, because he cares for me too much. I
thank monseigneur, and I thank Madame.”

“Come, come,” said the prince, “you are a delightful companion, and you
know I cannot do without you. Return as soon as you can.”

“Very well; but I am in the humor to prove myself difficult to be
pleased, in _my_ turn, monseigneur.”

“Bah!”

“So, I will not return to your royal highness, except upon one
condition.”

“Name it.”

“I want to oblige the friend of one of my friends.”

“What’s his name?”

“Malicorne.”

“An ugly name.”

“But very well borne, monseigneur.”

“That may be. Well?”

“Well, I owe M. Malicorne a place in your household, monseigneur.”

“What kind of a place?”

“Any kind of a place; a supervision of some sort or another, for
instance.”

“That happens very fortunately, for yesterday I dismissed my chief usher
of the apartments.”

“That will do admirably. What are his duties?”

“Nothing, except to look about and make his report.”

“A sort of interior police?”

“Exactly.”

“Ah, how excellently that will suit Malicorne,” Manicamp ventured to
say.

“You know the person we are speaking of, M. Manicamp?” inquired the
prince.

“Intimately, monseigneur. He is a friend of mine.”

“And your opinion is?”

“That your highness could never get a better usher of the apartments
than he will make.”

“How much does the appointment bring in?” inquired the comte of the
prince.

“I don’t know at all, only I have always been told that he could make as
much as he pleased when he was thoroughly in earnest.”

“What do you call being thoroughly in earnest, prince?”

“It means, of course, when the functionary in question is a man who has
his wits about him.”

“In that case I think your highness will be content, for Malicorne is as
sharp as the devil himself.”

“Good! the appointment will be an expensive one for me, in that case,”
 replied the prince, laughing. “You are making me a positive present,
comte.”

“I believe so, monseigneur.”

“Well, go and announce to your M. Melicorne--”

“Malicorne, monseigneur.”

“I shall never get hold of that name.”

“You say Manicamp very well, monseigneur.”

“Oh, I ought to say Malicorne very well, too. The alliteration will help
me.”

“Say what you like, monseigneur, I can promise you your inspector of
apartments will not be annoyed; he has the very happiest disposition
that can be met with.”

“Well, then, my dear De Guiche, inform him of his nomination. But,
stay--”

“What is it, monseigneur?”

“I wish to see him beforehand; if he be as ugly as his name, I retract
every word I have said.”

“Your highness knows him, for you have already seen him at the Palais
Royal; nay, indeed, it was I who presented him to you.”

“Ah, I remember now--not a bad-looking fellow.”

“I know you must have noticed him, monseigneur.”

“Yes, yes, yes. You see, De Guiche, I do not wish that either my wife or
myself should have ugly faces before our eyes. My wife will have all her
maids of honor pretty; I, all the gentlemen about me good-looking. In
this way, De Guiche, you see, that any children we may have will run a
good chance of being pretty, if my wife and myself have handsome models
before us.”

“Most magnificently argued, monseigneur,” said Manicamp, showing his
approval by look and voice at the same time.

As for De Guiche, he very probably did not find the argument so
convincing, for he merely signified his opinion by a gesture, which,
moreover, exhibited in a marked manner some indecision of mind on the
subject. Manicamp went off to inform Malicorne of the good news he had
just learned. De Guiche seemed very unwilling to take his departure
for the purpose of dressing himself. Monsieur, singing, laughing, and
admiring himself, passed away the time until the dinner-hour, in a frame
of mind that justified the proverb of “Happy as a prince.”



Chapter LVI. Story of a Dryad and a Naiad.

Every one had partaken of the banquet at the chateau, and afterwards
assumed their full court dresses. The usual hour for the repast was
five o’clock. If we say, then, that the repast occupied an hour, and
the toilette two hours, everybody was ready about eight o’clock in the
evening. Towards eight o’clock, then, the guests began to arrive
at Madame’s, for we have already intimated that it was Madame who
“received” that evening. And at Madame’s _soirees_ no one failed to
be present; for the evenings passed in her apartments always had that
perfect charm about them which the queen, that pious and excellent
princess, had not been able to confer upon her _reunions_. For,
unfortunately, one of the advantages of goodness of disposition is that
it is far less amusing than wit of an ill-natured character. And yet,
let us hasten to add, that such a style of wit could not be assigned
to Madame, for her disposition of mind, naturally of the very highest
order, comprised too much true generosity, too many noble impulses
and high-souled thoughts, to warrant her being termed ill-natured. But
Madame was endowed with a spirit of resistance--a gift frequently fatal
to its possessor, for it breaks where another disposition would have
bent; the result was that blows did not become deadened upon her as upon
what might be termed the cotton-wadded feelings of Maria Theresa.
Her heart rebounded at each attack, and therefore, whenever she was
attacked, even in a manner that almost stunned her, she returned blow
for blow to any one imprudent enough to tilt against her.

Was this really maliciousness of disposition or simply waywardness of
character? We regard those rich and powerful natures as like the tree
of knowledge, producing good and evil at the same time; a double branch,
always blooming and fruitful, of which those who wish to eat know how
to detect the good fruit, and from which the worthless and frivolous die
who have eaten of it--a circumstance which is by no means to be regarded
as a great misfortune. Madame, therefore, who had a well-disguised
plan in her mind of constituting herself the second, if not even the
principal, queen of the court, rendered her receptions delightful
to all, from the conversation, the opportunities of meeting, and the
perfect liberty she allowed every one of making any remark he pleased,
on the condition, however, that the remark was amusing or sensible. And
it will hardly be believed, that, by that means, there was less talking
among the society Madame assembled together than elsewhere. Madame hated
people who talked much, and took a remarkably cruel revenge upon them,
for she allowed them to talk. She disliked pretension, too, and never
overlooked that defect, even in the king himself. It was more than a
weakness of Monsieur, and the princess had undertaken the amazing task
of curing him of it. As for the rest, poets, wits, beautiful women, all
were received by her with the air of a mistress superior to her slaves.
Sufficiently meditative in her liveliest humors to make even poets
meditate; sufficiently pretty to dazzle by her attractions, even among
the prettiest; sufficiently witty for the most distinguished persons
who were present, to be listened to with pleasure--it will easily be
believed that the _reunions_ held in Madame’s apartments must naturally
have proved very attractive. All who were young flocked there, and when
the king himself happens to be young, everybody at court is so too.
And so, the older ladies of the court, the strong-minded women of the
regency, or of the last reign, pouted and sulked at their ease; but
others only laughed at the fits of sulkiness in which these venerable
individuals indulged, who had carried the love of authority so far as
even to take command of bodies of soldiers in the wars of the Fronde,
in order, as Madame asserted, not to lose their influence over men
altogether. As eight o’clock struck her royal highness entered the great
drawing-room accompanied by her ladies in attendance, and found several
gentlemen belonging to the court already there, having been waiting for
some minutes. Among those who had arrived before the hour fixed for the
reception she looked round for one who, she thought, ought to have been
first in attendance, but he was not there. However, almost at the very
moment she completed her investigation, Monsieur was announced. Monsieur
looked splendid. All the precious stones and jewels of Cardinal Mazarin,
which of course that minister could not do otherwise than leave; all the
queen-mother’s jewels as well as a few belonging to his wife--Monsieur
wore them all, and he was as dazzling as the rising sun. Behind him
followed De Guiche, with hesitating steps and an air of contrition
admirably assumed; De Guiche wore a costume of French-gray velvet,
embroidered with silver, and trimmed with blue ribbons: he wore also
Mechlin lace as rare and beautiful in its own way as the jewels of
Monsieur in theirs. The plume in his hat was red. Madame, too, wore
several colors, and preferred red for embroidery, gray for dress, and
blue for flowers. M. de Guiche, dressed as we have described, looked so
handsome that he excited every one’s observation. An interesting pallor
of complexion, a languid expression of the eyes, his white hands seen
through the masses of lace that covered them, the melancholy expression
of his mouth--it was only necessary, indeed, to see M. de Guiche to
admit that few men at the court of France could hope to equal him. The
consequence was that Monsieur, who was pretentious enough to fancy he
could eclipse a star even, if a star had adorned itself in a similar
manner to himself, was, on the contrary, completely eclipsed in all
imaginations, which are silent judges certainly, but very positive and
firm in their convictions. Madame looked at De Guiche lightly, but light
as her look had been, it brought a delightful color to his face. In
fact, Madame found De Guiche so handsome and so admirably dressed, that
she almost ceased regretting the royal conquest she felt she was on the
point of escaping her. Her heart, therefore, sent the blood to her face.
Monsieur approached her. He had not noticed the princess’s blush, or if
he had seen it, he was far from attributing it to its true cause.

“Madame,” he said, kissing his wife’s hand, “there is some one present
here, who has fallen into disgrace, an unhappy exile whom I venture to
recommend to your kindness. Do not forget, I beg, that he is one of
my best friends, and that a gentle reception of him will please me
greatly.”

“What exile? what disgraced person are you speaking of?” inquired
Madame, looking all round, and not permitting her glance to rest more on
the count than on the others.

This was the moment to present De Guiche, and the prince drew aside and
let De Guiche pass him, who, with a tolerably well-assumed awkwardness
of manner, approached Madame and made his reverence to her.

“What!” exclaimed Madame, as if she were greatly surprised, “is M. de
Guiche the disgraced individual you speak of, the exile in question?”

“Yes, certainly,” returned the duke.

“Indeed,” said Madame, “he seems almost the only person here!”

“You are unjust, Madame,” said the prince.

“I?”

“Certainly. Come, forgive the poor fellow.”

“Forgive him what? What have I to forgive M. de Guiche?”

“Come, explain yourself, De Guiche. What do you wish to be forgiven?”
 inquired the prince.

“Alas! her royal highness knows very well what it is,” replied the
latter, in a hypocritical tone.

“Come, come, give him your hand, Madame,” said Philip.

“If it will give you any pleasure, Monsieur,” and, with a movement of
her eyes and shoulders, which it would be impossible to describe, Madame
extended towards the young man her beautiful and perfumed hand, upon
which he pressed his lips. It was evident that he did so for some little
time, and that Madame did not withdraw her hand too quickly, for the
duke added:

“De Guiche is not wickedly disposed, Madame; so do not be afraid, he
will not bite you.”

A pretext was given in the gallery by the duke’s remark, which was
not, perhaps, very laughable, for every one to laugh excessively. The
situation was odd enough, and some kindly disposed persons had observed
it. Monsieur was still enjoying the effect of his remark, when the
king was announced. The appearance of the room at that moment was as
follows:--in the center, before the fireplace, which was filled with
flowers, Madame was standing up, with her maids of honor formed in two
wings, on either side of her; around whom the butterflies of the court
were fluttering. Several other groups were formed in the recesses of the
windows, like soldiers stationed in their different towers who belong to
the same garrison. From their respective places they could pick up the
remarks which fell from the principal group. From one of these groups,
the nearest to the fireplace, Malicorne, who had been at once raised to
the dignity, through Manicamp and De Guiche, of the post of master of
the apartments, and whose official costume had been ready for the last
two months, was brilliant with gold lace, and shone upon Montalais,
standing on Madame’s extreme left, with all the fire of his eyes and
splendor of his velvet. Madame was conversing with Mademoiselle
de Chatillon and Mademoiselle de Crequy, who were next to her, and
addressed a few words to Monsieur, who drew aside as soon as the king
was announced. Mademoiselle de la Valliere, like Montalais, was on
Madame’s left hand, and the last but one on the line, Mademoiselle de
Tonnay-Charente being on her right. She was stationed as certain bodies
of troops are, whose weakness is suspected, and who are placed between
two experienced regiments. Guarded in this manner by the companions who
had shared her adventure, La Valliere, whether from regret at Raoul’s
departure, or still suffering from the emotion caused by recent
events, which had begun to render her name familiar on the lips of
the courtiers, La Valliere, we repeat, hid her eyes, red with weeping,
behind her fan, and seemed to give the greatest attention to the remarks
which Montalais and Athenais, alternately, whispered to her from time to
time. As soon as the king’s name was announced a general movement took
place in the apartment. Madame, in her character as hostess, rose
to receive the royal visitor; but as she rose, notwithstanding her
preoccupation of mind, she glanced hastily towards her right; her
glance, which the presumptuous De Guiche regarded as intended for
himself, rested, as it swept over the whole circle, upon La Valliere,
whose warm blush and restless emotion it instantly perceived.

The king advanced to the middle of the group, which had now become a
general one, by a movement which took place from the circumference to
the center. Every head bowed low before his majesty, the ladies bending
like frail, magnificent lilies before King Aquilo. There was nothing
very severe, we will even say, nothing very royal that evening about the
king, except youth and good looks. He wore an air of animated joyousness
and good-humor which set all imaginations at work, and, thereupon, all
present promised themselves a delightful evening, for no other reason
than from having remarked the desire his majesty had to amuse himself
in Madame’s apartments. If there was any one in particular whose high
spirits and good-humor equalled the king’s, it was M. de Saint-Aignan,
who was dressed in a rose-colored costume, with face and ribbons of the
same color, and, in addition, particularly rose-colored in his
ideas, for that evening M. de Saint-Aignan was prolific in jests. The
circumstance which had given a new expansion to the numerous ideas
germinating in his fertile brain was, that he had just perceived
that Mademoiselle de Tonnay-Charente was, like himself, dressed in
rose-color. We would not wish to say, however, that the wily courtier
had not know beforehand that the beautiful Athenais was to wear that
particular color; for he very well knew the art of unlocking the lips of
a dress-maker or a lady’s maid as to her mistress’s intentions. He
cast as many killing glances at Mademoiselle Athenais as he had bows
of ribbons on his stockings and doublet; in other words he discharged
a prodigious number. The king having paid Madame the customary
compliments, and Madame having requested him to be seated, the circle
was immediately formed. Louis inquired of Monsieur the particulars of
the day’s bathing; and stated, looking at the ladies present while he
spoke, that certain poets were engaged turning into verse the enchanting
diversion of the baths of Vulaines, and that one of them particularly,
M. Loret, seemed to have been intrusted with the confidence of some
water-nymph, as he had in his verses recounted many circumstances that
were actually true--at which remark more than one lady present felt
herself bound to blush. The king at this moment took the opportunity of
looking round him at more leisure; Montalais was the only one who did
not blush sufficiently to prevent her looking at the king, and she
saw him fix his eyes devouringly on Mademoiselle de la Valliere. This
undaunted maid of honor, Mademoiselle de Montalais, be it understood,
forced the king to lower his gaze, and so saved Louise de la Valliere
from a sympathetic warmth of feeling this gaze might possibly have
conveyed. Louis was appropriated by Madame, who overwhelmed him with
inquiries, and no one in the world knew how to ask questions better than
she did. He tried, however, to render the conversation general, and,
with the view of effecting this, he redoubled his attention and devotion
to her. Madame coveted complimentary remarks, and, determined to procure
them at any cost, she addressed herself to the king, saying:

“Sire, your majesty, who is aware of everything which occurs in your
kingdom, ought to know beforehand the verses confided to M. Loret by
this nymph; will your majesty kindly communicate them to us?”

“Madame,” replied the king, with perfect grace of manner, “I dare
not--you, personally, might be in no little degree confused at having to
listen to certain details--but Saint-Aignan tells a story well, and has
a perfect recollection of the verses. If he does not remember them, he
will invent. I can certify he is almost a poet himself.” Saint-Aignan,
thus brought prominently forward, was compelled to introduce himself
as advantageously as possible. Unfortunately, however, for Madame, he
thought of his own personal affairs only; in other words, instead of
paying Madame the compliments she so much desired and relished, his
mind was fixed upon making as much display as possible of his own
good fortune. Again glancing, therefore, for the hundredth time at the
beautiful Athenais, who carried into practice her previous evening’s
theory of not even deigning to look at her adorer, he said:--

“Your majesty will perhaps pardon me for having too indifferently
remembered the verses which the nymph dictated to Loret; but if the
king has not retained any recollection of them, how could I possibly
remember?”

Madame did not receive this shortcoming of the courtier very favorably.

“Ah! madame,” added Saint-Aignan, “at present it is no longer a question
what the water-nymphs have to say; and one would almost be tempted to
believe that nothing of any interest now occurs in those liquid realms.
It is upon earth, madame, important events happen. Ah! Madame, upon the
earth, how many tales are there full of--”

“Well,” said Madame, “and what is taking place upon the earth?”

“That question must be asked of the Dryads,” replied the comte; “the
Dryads inhabit the forest, as your royal highness is aware.”

“I am aware also, that they are naturally very talkative, Monsieur de
Saint-Aignan.”

“Such is the case, Madame; but when they say such delightful things, it
would be ungracious to accuse them of being too talkative.”

“Do they talk so delightfully, then?” inquired the princess,
indifferently. “Really, Monsieur de Saint-Aignan, you excite my
curiosity; and, if I were the king, I would require you immediately to
tell us what the delightful things are these Dryads have been saying,
since you alone seem to understand their language.”

“I am at his majesty’s orders, Madame, in that respect,” replied the
comte, quickly.

“What a fortunate fellow this Saint-Aignan is to understand the language
of the Dryads,” said Monsieur.

“I understand it perfectly, monseigneur, as I do my own language.”

“Tell us all about them, then,” said Madame.

The king felt embarrassed, for his confidant was, in all probability,
about to embark in a difficult matter. He felt that it would be so, from
the general attention excited by Saint-Aignan’s preamble, and aroused
too by Madame’s peculiar manner. The most reserved of those who were
present seemed ready to devour every syllable the comte was about to
pronounce. They coughed, drew closer together, looked curiously at some
of the maids of honor, who, in order to support with greater propriety,
or with more steadiness, the fixity of the inquisitorial looks bent
upon them, adjusted their fans accordingly, and assumed the bearing of a
duelist about to be exposed to his adversary’s fire. At this epoch,
the fashion of ingeniously constructed conversations, and hazardously
dangerous recitals, so prevailed, that, where, in modern times, a whole
company assembled in a drawing-room would begin to suspect some scandal,
or disclosure, or tragic event, and would hurry away in dismay, Madame’s
guests quietly settled themselves in their places, in order not to lose
a word or gesture of the comedy composed by Monsieur de Saint-Aignan for
their benefit, and the termination of which, whatever the style and
the plot might be, must, as a matter of course, be marked by the most
perfect propriety. The comte as known as a man of extreme refinement,
and an admirable narrator. He courageously began, then, amidst a
profound silence, which would have been formidable to any one but
himself:--“Madame, by the king’s permission, I address myself, in the
first place, to your royal highness, since you admit yourself to be
the person present possessing the greatest curiosity. I have the
honor, therefore, to inform your royal highness that the Dryad
more particularly inhabits the hollows of oaks; and, as Dryads are
mythological creatures of great beauty, they inhabit the most beautiful
trees, in other words, the largest to be found.”

At this exordium, which recalled, under a transparent veil, the
celebrated story of the royal oak, which had played so important a part
in the last evening, so many hearts began to beat, both from joy and
uneasiness, that, if Saint-Aignan had not had a good and sonorous voice,
their throbbings might have been heard above the sound of his voice.

“There must surely be Dryads at Fontainebleau, then,” said Madame, in a
perfectly calm voice; “for I have never, in all my life, seen finer
oaks than in the royal park.” And as she spoke, she directed towards De
Guiche a look of which he had no reason to complain, as he had of the
one that preceded it; which, as we have already mentioned, had reserved
a certain amount of indefiniteness most painful for so loving a heart as
his.

“Precisely, Madame, it is of Fontainebleau I was about to speak to
your royal highness,” said Saint-Aignan; “for the Dryad whose story is
engaging our attention, lives in the park belonging to the chateau of
his majesty.”

The affair was fairly embarked on; the action was begun, and it was no
longer possible for auditory or narrator to draw back.

“It will be worth listening to,” said Madame; “for the story not only
appears to me to have all the interest of a national incident, but still
more, seems to be a circumstance of very recent occurrence.”

“I ought to begin at the beginning,” said the comte. “In the first
place, then, there lived at Fontainebleau, in a cottage of modest and
unassuming appearance, two shepherds. The one was the shepherd Tyrcis,
the owner of extensive domains transmitted to him from his parents, by
right of inheritance. Tyrcis was young and handsome, and, from his many
qualifications, he might be pronounced to be the first and foremost
among the shepherds in the whole country; one might even boldly say he
was the king of shepherds.” A subdued murmur of approbation encouraged
the narrator, who continued:--“His strength equals his courage; no one
displays greater address in hunting wild beasts, nor greater wisdom in
matters where judgment is required. Whenever he mounts and exercises his
horse in the beautiful plains of his inheritance, or whenever he joins
with the shepherds who owe him allegiance, in different games of skill
and strength, one might say that it is the god Mars hurling his lance on
the plains of Thrace, or, even better, that it was Apollo himself, the
god of day, radiant upon earth, bearing his flaming darts in his hand.”
 Every one understood that this allegorical portrait of the king was not
the worst exordium the narrator could have chosen; and consequently it
did not fail to produce its effect, either upon those who, from duty or
inclination, applauded it to the very echo, or on the king himself, to
whom flattery was very agreeable when delicately conveyed, and whom,
indeed, it did not always displease, even when it was a little too
broad. Saint-Aignan then continued:--“It is not in games of glory only,
ladies, that the shepherd Tyrcis had acquired that reputation by which
he was regarded as the king of the shepherds.”

“Of the shepherds of Fontainebleau,” said the king, smilingly, to
Madame.

“Oh!” exclaimed Madame, “Fontainebleau is selected arbitrarily by the
poet; but I should say, of the shepherds of the whole world.” The king
forgot his part of a passive auditor, and bowed.

“It is,” paused Saint-Aignan, amidst a flattering murmur of applause,
“it is with ladies fair especially that the qualities of this king of
the shepherds are most prominently displayed. He is a shepherd with a
mind as refined as his heart is pure; he can pay a compliment with a
charm of manner whose fascination it is impossible to resist; and in his
attachments he is so discreet, that beautiful and happy conquests may
regard their lot as more than enviable. Never a syllable of disclosure,
never a moment’s forgetfulness. Whoever has seen and heard Tyrcis
must love him; whoever loves and is beloved by him, has indeed found
happiness.” Saint-Aignan here paused; he was enjoying the pleasure
of all these compliments; and the portrait he had drawn, however
grotesquely inflated it might be, had found favor in certain ears,
in which the perfections of the shepherd did not seem to have been
exaggerated. Madame begged the orator to continue. “Tyrcis,” said the
comte, “had a faithful companion, or rather a devoted servant, whose
name was--Amyntas.”

“Ah!” said Madame, archly, “now for the portrait of Amyntas; you are
such an excellent painter, Monsieur de Saint-Aignan.”

“Madame--”

“Oh! comte, do not, I entreat you, sacrifice poor Amyntas; I should
never forgive you.”

“Madame, Amyntas is of too humble a position, particularly beside
Tyrcis, for his person to be honored by a parallel. There are certain
friends who resemble those followers of ancient times, who caused
themselves to be buried alive at their masters’ feet. Amyntas’s place,
too, is at the feet of Tyrcis; he cares for no other; and if, sometimes,
the illustrious hero--”

“Illustrious shepherd, you mean?” said Madame, pretending to correct M.
de Saint-Aignan.

“Your royal highness is right; I was mistaken,” returned the courtier;
“if, I say, the shepherd Tyrcis deigns occasionally to call Amyntas his
friend, and to open his heart to him, it is an unparalleled favor, which
the latter regards as the most unbounded felicity.”

“All that you say,” interrupted Madame, “establishes the extreme
devotion of Amyntas to Tyrcis, but does not furnish us with the portrait
of Amyntas. Comte, do not flatter him, if you like; but describe him to
us. I will have Amyntas’s portrait.” Saint-Aignan obeyed, after having
bowed profoundly to his majesty’s sister-in-law.

“Amyntas,” he said, “is somewhat older than Tyrcis; he is not an
ill-favored shepherd; it is even said that the muses condescended to
smile upon him at his birth, even as Hebe smiled upon youth. He is not
ambitious of display, but he is ambitious of being loved; and he might
not, perhaps, be found unworthy of it, if he were only sufficiently
well-known.”

This latter paragraph, strengthened by a killing glance, was directed
straight to Mademoiselle de Tonnay-Charente, who received them both
unmoved. But the modesty and tact of the allusion had produced a good
effect; Amyntas reaped the benefit of it in the applause bestowed upon
him: Tyrcis’s head even gave the signal for it by a consenting bow, full
of good feeling.

“One evening,” continued Saint-Aignan, “Tyrcis and Amyntas were walking
together in the forest, talking of their love disappointments. Do not
forget, ladies, that the story of the Dryad is now beginning, otherwise
it would be easy to tell you what Tyrcis and Amyntas, the two most
discreet shepherds of the whole earth, were talking about. They reached
the thickest part of the forest, for the purpose of being quite alone,
and of confiding their troubles more freely to each other, when suddenly
the sound of voices struck upon their ears.”

“Ah, ah!” said those who surrounded the narrator. “Nothing can be more
interesting.”

At this point, Madame, like a vigilant general inspecting his army,
glanced at Mademoiselle de Tonnay-Charente, who could not help wincing
as they drew themselves up.

“These harmonious voices,” resumed Saint-Aignan, “were those of certain
shepherdesses, who had been likewise desirous of enjoying the coolness
of the shade, and who, knowing the isolated and almost unapproachable
situation of the place, had betaken themselves there to interchange
their ideas upon--” A loud burst of laughter occasioned by this remark
of Saint-Aignan, and an imperceptible smile of the king, as he looked at
Tonnay-Charente, followed this sally.

“The Dryad affirms positively,” continued Saint-Aignan, “that the
shepherdesses were three in number, and that all three were young and
beautiful.”

“What were their names?” said Madame, quickly.

“Their names?” said Saint-Aignan, who hesitated from fear of committing
an indiscretion.

“Of course; you call your shepherds Tyrcis and Amyntas; give your
shepherdesses names in a similar manner.”

“Oh! Madame, I am not an inventor; I relate simply what took place as
the Dryad related it to me.”

“What did your Dryad, then, call these shepherdesses? You have a very
treacherous memory, I fear. This Dryad must have fallen out with the
goddess Mnemosyne.”

“These shepherdesses, Madame? Pray remember that it is a crime to betray
a woman’s name.”

“From which a woman absolves you, comte, on the condition that you will
reveal the names of the shepherdesses.”

“Their names were Phyllis, Amaryllis, and Galatea.”

“Exceedingly well!--they have not lost by the delay,” said Madame, “and
now we have three charming names. But now for their portraits.”

Saint-Aignan again made a slight movement.

“Nay, comte, let us proceed in due order,” returned Madame. “Ought we
not, sire, to have the portraits of the shepherdesses?”

The king, who expected this determined perseverance, and who began to
feel some uneasiness, did not think it safe to provoke so dangerous
an interrogator. He thought, too, that Saint-Aignan, in drawing the
portraits, would find a means of insinuating some flattering allusions
which would be agreeable to the ears of one his majesty was interested
in pleasing. It was with this hope and with this fear that Louis
authorized Saint-Aignan to sketch the portraits of the shepherdesses,
Phyllis, Amaryllis, and Galatea.

“Very well, then; be it so,” said Saint-Aignan, like a man who has made
up his mind, and he began.



Chapter LVII. Conclusion of the Story of a Naiad and of a Dryad.

“Phyllis,” said Saint-Aignan, with a glance of defiance at Montalais,
such as a fencing-master would give who invites an antagonist worthy
of him to place himself on guard, “Phyllis is neither fair nor dark,
neither tall nor short, neither too grave nor too gay; though but a
shepherdess, she is as witty as a princess, and as coquettish as the
most finished flirt that ever lived. Nothing can equal her excellent
vision. Her heart yearns for everything her gaze embraces. She is like
a bird, which, always warbling, at one moment skims the ground, at the
next rises fluttering in pursuit of a butterfly, then rests itself upon
the topmost branch of a tree, where it defies the bird-catchers either
to come and seize it or to entrap it in their nets.” The portrait bore
such a strong resemblance to Montalais, that all eyes were directed
towards her; she, however, with her head raised, and with a steady,
unmoved look, listened to Saint-Aignan, as if he were speaking of an
utter stranger.

“Is that all, Monsieur de Saint-Aignan?” inquired the princess.

“Oh! your royal highness, the portrait is but a mere sketch, and many
more additions could be made, but I fear to weary your patience, or
offend the modesty of the shepherdess, and I shall therefore pass on to
her companion, Amaryllis.”

“Very well,” said Madame, “pass on to Amaryllis, Monsieur de
Saint-Aignan, we are all attention.”

“Amaryllis is the eldest of the three, and yet,” Saint-Aignan hastened
to add, “this advanced age does not reach twenty years.”

Mademoiselle de Tonnay-Charente, who had slightly knitted her brows at
the commencement of the description, unbent them with a smile.

“She is tall, with an astonishing abundance of beautiful hair, which
she fastens in the manner of the Grecian statues; her walk is full of
majesty, her attitude haughty; she has the air, therefore, rather of a
goddess than a mere mortal, and among the goddesses, she most resembles
Diana the huntress; with this sole difference, however, that the cruel
shepherdess, having stolen the quiver of young love, while poor Cupid
was sleeping in a thicket of roses, instead of directing her arrows
against the inhabitants of the forest, discharges them pitilessly
against all poor shepherds who pass within reach of her bow and of her
eyes.”

“Oh! what a wicked shepherdess!” said Madame. “She may some day
wound herself with one of those arrows she discharges, as you say, so
mercilessly on all sides.”

“It is the hope of shepherds, one and all!” said Saint-Aignan.

“And that of the shepherd Amyntas in particular, I suppose?” said
Madame.

“The shepherd Amyntas is so timid,” said Saint-Aignan, with the most
modest air he could assume, “that if he cherishes such a hope as that,
no one has ever known anything about it, for he conceals it in the
very depths of his heart.” A flattering murmur of applause greeted this
profession of faith on behalf of the shepherd.

“And Galatea?” inquired Madame. “I am impatient to see a hand so
skillful as yours continue the portrait where Virgil left it, and finish
it before our eyes.”

“Madame,” said Saint-Aignan, “I am indeed a poor dumb post beside the
mighty Virgil. Still, encouraged by your desire, I will do my best.”

Saint-Aignan extended his foot and hand, and thus began:--“White as
milk, she casts upon the breeze the perfume of her fair hair tinged with
golden hues, as are the ears of corn. One is tempted to inquire if she
is not the beautiful Europa, who inspired Jupiter with a tender passion
as she played with her companions in the flower-spangled meadows. From
her exquisite eyes, blue as azure heaven on the clearest summer day,
emanates a tender light, which reverie nurtures, and love dispenses.
When she frowns, or bends her looks towards the ground, the sun is
veiled in token of mourning. When she smiles, on the contrary, nature
resumes her jollity, and the birds, for a brief moment silenced,
recommence their songs amid the leafy covert of the trees. Galatea,”
 said Saint-Aignan, in conclusion, “is worthy of the admiration of the
whole world; and if she should ever bestow her heart upon another, happy
will that man be to whom she consecrates her first affections.”

Madame, who had attentively listened to the portrait Saint-Aignan
had drawn, as, indeed, had all the others, contented herself with
accentuating her approbation of the most poetic passage by occasional
inclinations of her head; but it was impossible to say if these marks of
assent were accorded to the ability of the narrator of the resemblance
of the portrait. The consequence, therefore, was, that as Madame did not
openly exhibit any approbation, no one felt authorized to applaud, not
even Monsieur, who secretly thought that Saint-Aignan dwelt too much
upon the portraits of the shepherdesses, and had somewhat slightingly
passed over the portraits of the shepherds. The whole assembly seemed
suddenly chilled. Saint-Aignan, who had exhausted his rhetorical skill
and his palette of artistic tints in sketching the portrait of Galatea,
and who, after the favor with which his other descriptions had been
received, already imagined he could hear the loudest applause allotted
to this last one, was himself more disappointed than the king and the
rest of the company. A moment’s silence followed, which was at last
broken by Madame.

“Well, sir,” she inquired, “What is your majesty’s opinion of these
three portraits?”

The king, who wished to relieve Saint-Aignan’s embarrassment without
compromising himself, replied, “Why, Amaryllis, in my opinion, is
beautiful.”

“For my part,” said Monsieur, “I prefer Phyllis; she is a capital girl,
or rather a good-sort-of-fellow of a nymph.”

A gentle laugh followed, and this time the looks were so direct, that
Montalais felt herself blushing almost scarlet.

“Well,” resumed Madame, “what were those shepherdesses saying to each
other?”

Saint-Aignan, however, whose vanity had been wounded, did not feel
himself in a position to sustain an attack of new and refreshed troops,
and merely said, “Madame, the shepherdesses were confiding to one
another their little preferences.”

“Nay, nay! Monsieur de Saint-Aignan, you are a perfect stream of
pastoral poesy,” said Madame, with an amiable smile, which somewhat
comforted the narrator.

“They confessed that love is a mighty peril, but that the absence of
love is the heart’s sentence of death.”

“What was the conclusion they came to?” inquired Madame.

“They came to the conclusion that love was necessary.”

“Very good! Did they lay down any conditions?”

“That of choice, simply,” said Saint-Aignan. “I ought even to
add,--remember it is the Dryad who is speaking,--that one of the
shepherdesses, Amaryllis, I believe, was completely opposed to the
necessity of loving, and yet she did not positively deny that she had
allowed the image of a certain shepherd to take refuge in her heart.”

“Was it Amyntas or Tyrcis?”

“Amyntas, Madame,” said Saint-Aignan, modestly. “But Galatea, the gentle
and soft-eyed Galatea, immediately replied, that neither Amyntas, nor
Alphesiboeus, nor Tityrus, nor indeed any of the handsomest shepherds of
the country, were to be compared to Tyrcis; that Tyrcis was as superior
to all other men, as the oak to all other trees, as the lily in its
majesty to all other flowers. She drew even such a portrait of Tyrcis
that Tyrcis himself, who was listening, must have felt truly flattered
at it, notwithstanding his rank as a shepherd. Thus Tyrcis and Amyntas
had been distinguished by Phyllis and Galatea; and thus had the secrets
of two hearts revealed beneath the shades of evening, and amid the
recesses of the woods. Such, Madame, is what the Dryad related to me;
she who knows all that takes place in the hollows of oaks and grassy
dells; she who knows the loves of the birds, and all they wish to convey
by their songs; she who understands, in fact, the language of the wind
among the branches, the humming of the insect with its gold and emerald
wings in the corolla of the wild-flowers; it was she who related the
particulars to me, and I have repeated them.”

“And now you have finished, Monsieur de Saint-Aignan, have you not?”
 said Madame, with a smile that made the king tremble.

“Quite finished,” replied Saint-Aignan, “and but too happy if I have
been able to amuse your royal highness for a few moments.”

“Moments which have been too brief,” replied the princess; “for you
have related most admirably all you know; but, my dear Monsieur
de Saint-Aignan, you have been unfortunate enough to obtain your
information from one Dryad only, I believe?”

“Yes, Madame, only from one, I confess.”

“The fact was, that you passed by a little Naiad, who pretended to know
nothing at all, and yet knew a great deal more than your Dryad, my dear
comte.”

“A Naiad!” repeated several voices, who began to suspect that the story
had a continuation.

“Of course close beside the oak you are speaking of, which, if I am
not mistaken, is called the royal oak--is it not so, Monsieur de
Saint-Aignan?”

Saint-Aignan and the king exchanged glances.

“Yes, Madame,” the former replied.

“Well, close beside the oak there is a pretty little spring, which
runs murmuringly over the pebbles, between banks of forget-me-nots and
daffodils.”

“I believe you are correct,” said the king, with some uneasiness, and
listening with some anxiety to his sister-in-law’s narrative.

“Oh! there is one, I can assure you,” said Madame; “and the proof of it
is, that the Naiad who resides in that little stream stopped me as I was
about to come.”

“Ah?” said Saint-Aignan.

“Yes, indeed,” continued the princess, “and she did so in order to
communicate to me many particulars Monsieur de Saint-Aignan has omitted
in his recital.”

“Pray relate them yourself, then,” said Monsieur, “you can relate
stories in such a charming manner.” The princess bowed at the conjugal
compliment paid her.

“I do not possess the poetical powers of the comte, nor his ability to
bring to light the smallest details.”

“You will not be listened to with less interest on that account,” said
the king, who already perceived that something hostile was intended in
his sister-in-law’s story.

“I speak, too,” continued Madame, “in the name of that poor little
Naiad, who is indeed the most charming creature I ever met. Moreover,
she laughed so heartily while she was telling me her story, that, in
pursuance of that medical axiom that laughter is the finest physic in
the world, I ask permission to laugh a little myself when I recollect
her words.”

The king and Saint-Aignan, who noticed spreading over many of the faces
present a distant and prophetic ripple of the laughter Madame announced,
finished by looking at each other, as if asking themselves whether there
was not some little conspiracy concealed beneath these words. But Madame
was determined to turn the knife in the wound over and over again; she
therefore resumed with the air of the most perfect candor, in other
words, with the most dangerous of all her airs: “Well, then, I passed
that way,” she said, “and as I found beneath my steps many fresh
flowers newly blown, no doubt Phyllis, Amaryllis, Galatea, and all your
shepherdesses had passed the same way before me.”

The king bit his lips, for the recital was becoming more and more
threatening. “My little Naiad,” continued Madame, “was cooing over her
quaint song in the bed of the rivulet; as I perceived that she accosted
me by touching the hem of my dress, I could not think of receiving her
advances ungraciously, and more particularly so, since, after all, a
divinity, even though she be of a second grade, is always of greater
importance than a mortal, though a princess. I thereupon accosted the
Naiad, and bursting into laughter, this is what she said to me:

“‘Fancy, princess...’ You understand, sire, it is the Naiad who is
speaking?”

The king bowed assentingly; and Madame continued:--“‘Fancy, princess,
the banks of my little stream have just witnessed a most amusing scene.
Two shepherds, full of curiosity, even indiscreetly so, have allowed
themselves to be mystified in a most amusing manner by three nymphs, or
three shepherdesses,’--I beg your pardon, but I do not now remember if
it was nymphs or shepherdesses she said; but it does not much matter, so
we will continue.”

The king, at this opening, colored visibly, and Saint-Aignan, completely
losing countenance, began to open his eyes in the greatest possible
anxiety.

“‘The two shepherds,’ pursued my nymph, still laughing, ‘followed in
the wake of the three young ladies,’--no, I mean, of the three nymphs;
forgive me, I ought to say, of the three shepherdesses. It is not always
wise to do that, for it may be awkward for those who are followed. I
appeal to all the ladies present, and not one of them, I am sure, will
contradict me.”

The king, who was much disturbed by what he suspected was about to
follow, signified his assent by a gesture.

“‘But,’ continued the Naiad, ‘the shepherdesses had noticed Tyrcis and
Amyntas gliding into the wood, and, by the light of the moon, they
had recognized them through the grove of the trees.’ Ah, you laugh!”
 interrupted Madame; “wait, wait, you are not yet at the end.”

The king turned pale; Saint-Aignan wiped his forehead, now dewed
with perspiration. Among the groups of ladies present could be heard
smothered laughter and stealthy whispers.

“‘The shepherdesses, I was saying, noticing how indiscreet the two
shepherds were, proceeded to sit down at the foot of the royal oak; and,
when they perceived that their over-curious listeners were sufficiently
near, so that not a syllable of what they might say could be lost, they
addressed towards them very innocently, in the most artless manner
in the world indeed, a passionate declaration, which from the vanity
natural to all men, and even to the most sentimental of shepherds,
seemed to the two listeners as sweet as honey.’”

The king, at these words, which the assembly was unable to hear without
laughing, could not restrain a flash of anger darting from his eyes. As
for Saint-Aignan, he let his head fall upon his breast, and concealed,
under a silly laugh, the extreme annoyance he felt.

“Oh,” said the king, drawing himself up to his full height, “upon my
word, that is a most amusing jest, certainly; but, really and truly, are
you sure you quite understood the language of the Naiads?”

“The comte, sire, pretends to have perfectly understood that of the
Dryads,” retorted Madame, icily.

“No doubt,” said the king; “but you know the comte has the weakness to
aspire to become a member of the Academy, so that, with this object in
view, he has learnt all sorts of things of which very happily you are
ignorant; and it might possibly happen that the language of the Nymph of
the Waters might be among the number of things you have not studied.”

“Of course, sire,” replied Madame, “for facts of that nature one
does not altogether rely upon one’s self alone; a woman’s ear is not
infallible, so says Saint Augustine; and I, therefore, wished to satisfy
myself by other opinions beside my own, and as my Naiad, who, in her
character of a goddess, is polyglot,--is not that the expression, M. de
Saint-Aignan?”

“I believe so,” said the latter, quite out of countenance.

“Well,” continued the princess, “as my Naiad, who, in her character of
a goddess, had, at first spoken to me in English, I feared, as
you suggest, that I might have misunderstood her, and I requested
Mesdemoiselles de Montalais, de Tonnay-Charente, and de la Valliere, to
come to me, begging my Naiad to repeat to me in the French language, the
recital she had already communicated to me in English.”

“And did she do so?” inquired the king.

“Oh, she is the most polite divinity it is possible to imagine! Yes,
sire, she did so; so that no doubt whatever remains on the subject. Is
it not so, young ladies?” said the princess, turning towards the left of
her army; “did not the Naiad say precisely what I have related, and
have I, in any one particular, exceeded the truth, Phyllis? I beg your
pardon, I mean Mademoiselle Aure de Montalais?”

“Precisely as you have stated, Madame,” articulated Mademoiselle de
Montalais, very distinctly.

“Is it true, Mademoiselle de Tonnay-Charente?”

“The perfect truth,” replied Athenais, in a voice quite as firm, but not
yet so distinct.

“And you, La Valliere?” asked Madame.

The poor girl felt the king’s ardent look fixed upon her,--she dared
not deny--she dared not tell a falsehood; she merely bowed her head;
and everybody took it for a token of assent. Her head, however, was not
raised again, chilled as she was by a coldness more bitter than that of
death. This triple testimony overwhelmed the king. As for Saint-Aignan,
he did not even attempt to dissemble his despair, and, hardly knowing
what he said, he stammered out, “An excellent jest! admirably played!”

“A just punishment for curiosity,” said the king, in a hoarse voice.
“Oh! who would think, after the chastisement that Tyrcis and Amyntas
had suffered, of endeavoring to surprise what is passing in the heart of
shepherdesses? Assuredly I shall not, for one; and, you, gentlemen?”

“Nor I! nor I!” repeated, in a chorus, the group of courtiers.

Madame was filled with triumph at the king’s annoyance; and was full of
delight, thinking that her story had been, or was to be, the termination
of the whole affair. As for Monsieur, who had laughed at the two stories
without comprehending anything about them, he turned towards De Guiche,
and said to him, “Well, comte, you say nothing; can you not find
something to say? Do you pity M. Tyrcis and M. Amyntas, for instance?”

“I pity them with all my soul,” replied De Guiche; “for, in very truth,
love is so sweet a fancy, that to lose it, fancy though it may be, is to
lose more than life itself. If, therefore, these two shepherds thought
themselves beloved,--if they were happy in that idea, and if, instead
of that happiness, they meet not only that empty void which resembles
death, but jeers and jests at love itself, which is worse than a
thousand deaths,--in that case, I say that Tyrcis and Amyntas are the
two most unhappy men I know.”

“And you are right, too, Monsieur de Guiche,” said the king; “for, in
fact, the injury in question is a very hard return for a little harmless
curiosity.”

“That is as much to say, then, that the story of my Naiad has displeased
the king?” asked Madame, innocently.

“Nay, Madame, undeceive yourself,” said Louis, taking the princess by
the hand; “your Naiad, on the contrary, has pleased me, and the more so,
because she was so truthful, and because her tale, I ought to add, is
confirmed by the testimony of unimpeachable witnesses.”

These words fell upon La Valliere, accompanied by a look that on one,
from Socrates to Montaigne, could have exactly defined. The look and the
king’s remark succeeded in overpowering the unhappy girl, who, with her
head upon Montalais’s shoulder, seemed to have fainted away. The king
rose, without remarking this circumstance, of which no one, moreover,
took any notice, and, contrary to his usual custom, for generally he
remained late in Madame’s apartments, he took his leave, and retired to
his own side of the palace. Saint-Aignan followed him, leaving the rooms
in as much despair as he had entered them with delight. Mademoiselle
de Tonnay-Charente, less sensitive than La Valliere, was not much
frightened, and did not faint. However, it may be that the last look of
Saint-Aignan had hardly been so majestic as the king’s.



Chapter LVIII. Royal Psychology.

The king returned to his apartments with hurried steps. The reason he
walked as fast as he did was probably to avoid tottering in his gait.
He seemed to leave behind him as he went along a trace of a mysterious
sorrow. That gayety of manner, which every one had remarked in him on
his arrival, and which they had been delighted to perceive, had not
perhaps been understood in its true sense: but his stormy departure, his
disordered countenance, all knew, or at least thought they could
tell the reason of. Madame’s levity of manner, her somewhat bitter
jests,--bitter for persons of a sensitive disposition, and particularly
for one of the king’s character; the great resemblance which naturally
existed between the king and an ordinary mortal, were among the reasons
assigned for the precipitate and unexpected departure of his majesty.
Madame, keen-sighted enough in other respects, did not, however, at
first see anything extraordinary in it. It was quite sufficient for her
to have inflicted some slight wound upon the vanity or self-esteem of
one who, so soon forgetting the engagements he had contracted, seemed to
have undertaken to disdain, without cause, the noblest and highest prize
in France. It was not an unimportant matter for Madame, in the present
position of affairs, to let the king perceive the difference which
existed between the bestowal of his affections on one in a high station,
and the running after each passing fancy, like a youth fresh from the
provinces. With regard to those higher placed affections, recognizing
their dignity and their illimitable influence, acknowledging in them
a certain etiquette and display--a monarch not only did not act in a
manner derogatory to his high position, but found even repose, security,
mystery, and general respect therein. On the contrary, in the debasement
of a common or humble attachment, he would encounter, even among his
meanest subjects, carping and sarcastic remarks; he would forfeit his
character of infallibility and inviolability. Having descended to
the region of petty human miseries, he would be subjected to paltry
contentions. In one word, to convert the royal divinity into a mere
mortal by striking at his heart, or rather even at his face, like the
meanest of his subjects, was to inflict a terrible blow upon the pride
of that generous nature. Louis was more easily captivated by vanity than
affection. Madame had wisely calculated her vengeance, and it has been
seen, also, in what manner she carried it out. Let it not be supposed,
however, that Madame possessed such terrible passions as the heroines of
the middle ages, or that she regarded things from a pessimistic point of
view; on the contrary, Madame, young, amiable, of cultivated intellect,
coquettish, loving in her nature, but rather from fancy, or imagination,
or ambition, than from her heart--Madame, we say, on the contrary,
inaugurated that epoch of light and fleeting amusements, which
distinguished the hundred and twenty years that intervened between
the middle of the seventeenth century, and the last quarter of the
eighteenth. Madame saw, therefore, or rather fancied she saw,
things under their true aspect; she knew that the king, her august
brother-in-law, had been the first to ridicule the humble La Valliere,
and that, in accordance with his usual custom, it was hardly probable
he would ever love the person who had excited his laughter, even had it
been only for a moment. Moreover, was not her vanity ever present,
that evil influence which plays so important a part in that comedy of
dramatic incidents called the life of a woman? Did not her vanity tell
her, aloud, in a subdued voice, in a whisper, in every variety of tone,
that she could not, in reality, she a princess, young, beautiful, and
rich, be compared to the poor La Valliere, as youthful as herself it
is true, but far less pretty, certainly, and utterly without money,
protectors, or position? And surprise need not be excited with respect
to Madame; for it is known that the greatest characters are those
who flatter themselves the most in the comparisons they draw between
themselves and others, between others and themselves. It may perhaps be
asked what was Madame’s motive for an attack so skillfully conceived
and executed. Why was there such a display of forces, if it were not
seriously her intention to dislodge the king from a heart that had never
been occupied before, in which he seemed disposed to take refuge? Was
there any necessity, then, for Madame to attach so great an importance
to La Valliere, if she did not fear her? Yet Madame did not fear La
Valliere in that direction in which an historian, who knows everything,
sees into the future, or rather, the past. Madame was neither a
prophetess nor a sibyl; nor could she, any more than another, read what
was written in that terrible and fatal book of the future, which records
in its most secret pages the most serious events. No, Madame desired
simply to punish the king for having availed himself of secret means
altogether feminine in their nature; she wished to prove to him that if
he made use of offensive weapons of that nature, she, a woman of ready
wit and high descent, would assuredly discover in the arsenal of her
imagination defensive weapons proof even against the thrusts of a
monarch. Moreover, she wished him to learn that, in a war of that
description, kings are held of no account, or, at all events, that kings
who fight on their own behalf, like ordinary individuals, may witness
the fall of their crown in the first encounter; and that, in fact, if he
had expected to be adored by all the ladies of the court from the
very first, from a confident reliance on his mere appearance, it was a
pretension which was most preposterous and insulting even, for certain
persons who filled a higher position than others, and that a lesson
taught in season to this royal personage, who assumed too high and
haughty a carriage, would be rendering him a great service. Such,
indeed, were Madame’s reflections with respect to the king. The sequel
itself was not thought of. And in this manner, it will be seen that she
had exercised all her influence over the minds of her maids of honor,
and with all its accompanying details, had arranged the comedy which had
just been acted. The king was completely bewildered by it; for the first
time since he had escaped from the trammels of M. de Mazarin, he found
himself treated as a man. Similar severity from any of his subjects
would have been at once resisted by him. Strength comes with battle.
But to match one’s self with women, to be attacked by them, to have been
imposed upon by mere girls from the country, who had come from Blois
expressly for that purpose; it was the depth of dishonor for a young
sovereign full of the pride his personal advantages and royal power
inspired him with. There was nothing he could do--neither reproaches,
nor exile--nor could he even show the annoyance he felt. To manifest
vexation would have been to admit that he had been touched, like
Hamlet, by a sword from which the button had been removed--the sword of
ridicule. To show animosity against women--humiliation! especially
when the women in question have laughter on their side, as a means of
vengeance. If, instead of leaving all the responsibility of the affair
to these women, one of the courtiers had had anything to do with the
intrigue, how delightedly would Louis have seized the opportunity of
turning the Bastile to personal account. But there, again, the king’s
anger paused, checked by reason. To be the master of armies, of prisons,
of an almost divine authority, and to exert such majesty and might in
the service of a petty grudge, would be unworthy not only of a monarch,
but even of a man. It was necessary, therefore, simply to swallow the
affront in silence, and to wear his usual gentleness and graciousness
of expression. It was essential to treat Madame as a friend. As a
friend!--Well, and why not? Either Madame had been the instigator of the
affair, or the affair itself had found her passive. If she had been the
instigator of it, it certainly was a bold measure on her part, but, at
all events, it was but natural in her. Who was it that had sought her in
the earliest moments of her married life to whisper words of love in
her ear? Who was it that had dared to calculate the possibility of
committing a crime against the marriage vow--a crime, too, still more
deplorable on account of the relationship between them? Who was it that,
shielded behind his royal authority, had said to this young creature:
be not afraid, love but the king of France, who is above all, and a
movement of whose sceptered hand will protect you against all attacks,
even from your own remorse? And she had listened to and obeyed the royal
voice, had been influenced by his ensnaring tones; and when, morally
speaking, she had sacrificed her honor in listening to him, she saw
herself repaid for her sacrifice by an infidelity the more humiliating,
since it was occasioned by a woman far beneath her in the world.

Had Madame, therefore, been the instigator of the revenge, she would
have been right. If, on the contrary, she had remained passive in the
whole affair, what grounds had the king to be angry with her on that
account? Was it for her to restrain, or rather could she restrain, the
chattering of a few country girls? and was it for her, by an excess
of zeal that might have been misinterpreted, to check, at the risk of
increasing it, the impertinence of their conduct? All these various
reasonings were like so many actual stings to the king’s pride; but when
he had carefully, in his own mind, gone over all the various causes of
complaint, Louis was surprised, upon due reflection--in other words,
after the wound has been dressed--to find that there were other causes
of suffering, secret, unendurable, and unrevealed. There was one
circumstance he dared not confess, even to himself; namely, that the
acute pain from which he was suffering had its seat in his heart. The
fact is, he had permitted his heart to be gratified by La Valliere’s
innocent confusion. He had dreamed of a pure affection--of an affection
for Louis the man, and not the sovereign--of an affection free from
all self-interest; and his heart, simpler and more youthful than he had
imagined it to be, had to meet that other heart that had revealed
itself to him by its aspirations. The commonest thing in the complicated
history of love, is the double inoculation of love to which any two
hearts are subjected; the one loves nearly always before the other, in
the same way that the latter finishes nearly always by loving after the
other. In this way, the electric current is established, in proportion
to the intensity of the passion which is first kindled. The more
Mademoiselle de la Valliere showed her affection, the more the king’s
affection had increased. And it was precisely that which had annoyed his
majesty. For it was now fairly demonstrated to him, that no sympathetic
current had been the means of hurrying his heart away in its course,
because there had been no confession of love in the case--because the
confession was, in fact, an insult towards the man and towards the
sovereign; and finally, because--and the word, too, burnt like a hot
iron--because, in fact, it was nothing but a mystification after all.
This girl, therefore, who, in strictness, could not lay claim to
beauty, or birth, or great intelligence--who had been selected by Madame
herself, on account of her unpretending position, had not only aroused
the king’s regard, but had, moreover, treated him with disdain--he, the
king, a man who, like an eastern potentate, had but to bestow a glance,
to indicate with his finger, to throw his handkerchief. And, since the
previous evening, his mind had been so absorbed with this girl that he
could think and dream of nothing else. Since the previous evening his
imagination had been occupied by clothing her image with charms to which
she could not lay claim. In very truth, he whom such vast interests
summoned, and whom so many women smiled upon invitingly, had, since the
previous evening, consecrated every moment of his time, every throb of
his heart, to this sole dream. It was, indeed, either too much, or not
sufficient. The indignation of the king, making him forget everything,
and, among others, that Saint-Aignan was present, was poured out in
the most violent imprecations. True it is, that Saint-Aignan had taken
refuge in a corner of the room; and from his corner, regarded
the tempest passing over. His own personal disappointment seemed
contemptible, in comparison with the anger of the king. He compared
with his own petty vanity the prodigious pride of offended majesty;
and, being well read in the hearts of kings in general, and in those of
powerful kings in particular, he began to ask himself if this weight of
anger, as yet held in suspense, would not soon terminate by falling
upon his own head, for the very reason that others were guilty, and
he innocent. In point of fact, the king, all at once, did arrest his
hurried pace; and, fixing a look full of anger upon Saint-Aignan,
suddenly cried out: “And you, Saint-Aignan?”

Saint-Aignan made a sign which was intended to signify, “Well, sire?”

“Yes; you have been as silly as myself, I think.”

“Sire,” stammered out Saint-Aignan.

“You permitted us to be deceived by this shameless trick.”

“Sire,” said Saint-Aignan, whose agitation was such as to make him
tremble in every limb, “let me entreat your majesty not to exasperate
yourself. Women, you know, are characters full of imperfections, created
for the misfortune of mankind: to expect anything good from them is to
require them to perform impossibilities.”

The king, who had the greatest consideration for himself, and who had
begun to acquire over his emotions that command which he preserved over
them all his life, perceived that he was doing an outrage to his own
dignity in displaying so much animosity about so trifling an object.
“No,” he said, hastily; “you are mistaken, Saint-Aignan; I am not angry;
I can only wonder that we should have been turned into ridicule so
cleverly and with such audacity by these young girls. I am particularly
surprised that, although we might have informed ourselves accurately on
the subject, we were silly enough to leave the matter for our own hearts
to decide.”

“The heart, sire, is an organ which requires positively to be reduced to
its material functions, but which, for the sake of humanity’s peace of
mind, should be deprived of all its metaphysical inclinations. For my
own part, I confess, when I saw that your majesty’s heart was so taken
up by this little--”

“My heart taken up! I! My mind might, perhaps, have been so; but as for
my heart, it was--” Louis again perceived that, in order to fill one
gulf, he was about to dig another. “Besides,” he added, “I have no fault
to find with the girl. I was quite aware that she was in love with some
one else.”

“The Vicomte de Bragelonne. I informed your majesty of the
circumstance.”

“You did so: but you were not the first who told me. The Comte de la
Fere had solicited from me Mademoiselle de la Valliere’s hand for his
son. And, on his return from England, the marriage shall be celebrated,
since they love each other.”

“I recognize your majesty’s great generosity of disposition in that
act.”

“So, Saint-Aignan, we will cease to occupy ourselves with these matters
any longer,” said Louis.

“Yes, we will digest the affront, sire,” replied the courtier, with
resignation.

“Besides, it will be an easy matter to do so,” said the king, checking a
sigh.

“And, by way of a beginning, I will set about the composition of an
epigram upon all three of them. I will call it ‘The Naiad and Dryad,’
which will please Madame.”

“Do so, Saint-Aignan, do so,” said the king, indifferently. “You shall
read me your verses; they will amuse me. Ah! it does not signify,
Saint-Aignan,” added the king, like a man breathing with difficulty,
“the blow requires more than human strength to support in a dignified
manner.” As the king thus spoke, assuming an air of the most angelic
patience, one of the servants in attendance knocked gently at the door.
Saint-Aignan drew aside, out of respect.

“Come in,” said the king. The servant partially opened the door. “What
is it?” inquired Louis.

The servant held out a letter of a triangular shape. “For your majesty,”
 he said.

“From whom?”

“I do not know. One of the officers on duty gave it to me.”

The valet, in obedience to a gesture of the king, handed him the
letter. The king advanced towards the candles, opened the note, read
the signature, and uttered a loud cry. Saint-Aignan was sufficiently
respectful not to look on; but, without looking on, he saw and heard
all, and ran towards the king, who with a gesture dismissed the servant.
“Oh, heavens!” said the king, as he read the note.

“Is your majesty unwell?” inquired Saint-Aignan, stretching forward his
arms.

“No, no, Saint-Aignan--read!” and he handed him the note.

Saint-Aignan’s eyes fell upon the signature. “La Valliere!” he
exclaimed. “Oh, sire!”

“Read, _read!_”

And Saint-Aignan read:

“Forgive my importunity, sire; and forgive, also, the absence of the
formalities which may be wanting in this letter. A note seems to be more
speedy and more urgent than a dispatch. I venture, therefore, to address
this note to your majesty. I have retired to my own room, overcome with
grief and fatigue, sire; and I implore your majesty to grant me the
favor of an audience, which will enable me to confess the _truth_ to my
sovereign.

“LOUISE de la VALLIERE.”

“Well?” asked the king, taking the letter from Saint-Aignan’s hands, who
was completely bewildered by what he had just read.

“Well!” repeated Saint-Aignan.

“What do you think of it?”

“I hardly know.”

“Still, what is your opinion?”

“Sire, the young lady must have heard the muttering of the thunder, and
has got frightened.”

“Frightened at what?” asked Louis with dignity.

“Why, your majesty has a thousand reasons to be angry with the author or
authors of so hazardous a joke; and, if your majesty’s memory were to be
awakened in a disagreeable sense, it would be a perpetual menace hanging
over the head of this imprudent girl.”

“Saint-Aignan, I do not think as you do.”

“Your majesty doubtless sees more clearly than myself.”

“Well! I see affliction and restraint in these lines; more particularly
since I recall some of the details of the scene which took place this
evening in Madame’s apartments--” The king suddenly stopped, leaving his
meaning unexpressed.

“In fact,” resumed Saint-Aignan, “your majesty will grant an audience;
nothing is clearer than that.”

“I will do better, Saint-Aignan.”

“What is that, sire?”

“Put on your cloak.”

“But, sire--”

“You know the suite of rooms where Madame’s maids of honor are lodged?”

“Certainly.”

“You know some means of obtaining an entrance there.”

“As far as that is concerned, I do not.”

“At all events, you must be acquainted with some one there.”

“Really, your majesty is the source of every good idea.”

“You do know some one, then. Who is it?”

“I know a certain gentleman, who is on very good terms with a certain
young lady there.”

“One of the maids of honor?”

“Yes, sire.”

“With Mademoiselle de Tonnay-Charente, I suppose?” said the king,
laughing.

“Fortunately, no, sire; with Montalais.”

“What is his name?”

“Malicorne.”

“And you can depend on him?”

“I believe so, sire. He ought to have a key of some sort in his
possession; and if he should happen to have one, as I have done him a
service, why, he will let us have it.”

“Nothing could be better. Let us set off immediately.”

The king threw his cloak over Saint-Aignan’s shoulders, asked him for
his, and both went out into the vestibule.



Chapter LIX. Something That neither Naiad nor Dryad Foresaw.

Saint-Aignan stopped at the foot of the staircase leading to the
_entresol_, where the maids of honor were lodged, and to the first
floor, where Madame’s apartments were situated. Then, by means of one
of the servants who was passing, he sent to apprise Malicorne, who was
still with Monsieur. After having waited ten minutes, Malicorne arrived,
full of self-importance. The king drew back towards the darkest part of
the vestibule. Saint-Aignan, on the contrary, advanced to meet him, but
at the first words, indicating his wish, Malicorne drew back abruptly.

“Oh, oh!” he said, “you want me to introduce you into the rooms of the
maids of honor?”

“Yes.”

“You know very well that I cannot do anything of the kind, without being
made acquainted with your object.”

“Unfortunately, my dear Monsieur Malicorne, it is quite impossible for
me to give you any explanation; you must therefore confide in me as in a
friend who got you out of a great difficulty yesterday, and who now begs
you to draw him out of one to-day.”

“Yet I told you, monsieur, what my object was; which was, not to sleep
out in the open air, and any man might express the same wish, whilst
you, however, admit nothing.”

“Believe me, my dear Monsieur Malicorne,” Saint-Aignan persisted, “that
if I were permitted to explain myself, I would do so.”

“In that case, my dear monsieur, it is impossible for me to allow you to
enter Mademoiselle de Montalais’s apartment.”

“Why so?”

“You know why, better than any one else, since you caught me on the wall
paying my addresses to Mademoiselle de Montalais; it would, therefore,
be an excess of kindness on my part, you will admit, since I am paying
my attentions to her, to open the door of her room to you.”

“But who told you it was on her account I asked you for the key?”

“For whom, then?”

“She does not lodge there alone, I suppose?”

“No, certainly; for Mademoiselle de la Valliere shares her rooms with
her; but, really, you have nothing more to do with Mademoiselle de la
Valliere than with Mademoiselle de Montalais, and there are only two men
to whom I would give this key; to M. de Bragelonne, if he begged me to
give it to him, and to the king, if he commanded me.”

“In that case, give me the key, monsieur: I order you to do so,” said
the king, advancing from the obscurity, and partially opening his cloak.
“Mademoiselle de Montalais will step down to talk with you, while we go
up-stairs to Mademoiselle de la Valliere, for, in fact, it is she only
whom we desire to see.”

“The king!” exclaimed Malicorne, bowing to the very ground.

“Yes, the king,” said Louis, smiling: “the king, who is as pleased with
your resistance as with your capitulation. Rise, monsieur, and render us
the service we request of you.”

“I obey, your majesty,” said Malicorne, leading the way up the
staircase.

“Get Mademoiselle de Montalais to come down,” said the king, “and do not
breathe a word to her of my visit.”

Malicorne bowed in token of obedience, and proceeded up the staircase.
But the king, after a hasty reflection, followed him, and that, too,
with such rapidity, that, although Malicorne was already more than
half-way up the staircase, the king reached the room at the same
moment. He then observed, by the door which remained half-opened behind
Malicorne, La Valliere, sitting in an armchair with her head thrown
back, and in the opposite corner Montalais, who, in her dressing-gown,
was standing before a looking-glass, engaged in arranging her hair, and
parleying the while with Malicorne. The king hurriedly opened the door
and entered the room. Montalais called out at the noise made by the
opening of the door, and, recognizing the king, made her escape. La
Valliere rose from her seat, like a dead person galvanized, and then
fell back in her armchair. The king advanced slowly towards her.

“You wished for an audience, I believe,” he said coldly. “I am ready to
hear you. Speak.”

Saint-Aignan, faithful to his character of being deaf, blind, and dumb,
had stationed himself in a corner of the door, upon a stool which by
chance he found there. Concealed by the tapestry which covered the
doorway, and leaning his back against the wall, he could thus listen
without being seen; resigning himself to the post of a good watch-dog,
who patiently waits and watches without ever getting in his master’s
way.

La Valliere, terror-stricken at the king’s irritated aspect, rose a
second time, and assuming a posture full of humility and entreaty,
murmured, “Forgive me, sire.”

“What need is there for my forgiveness?” asked Louis.

“Sire, I have been guilty of a great fault; nay, more than a great
fault, a great crime.”

“You?”

“Sire, I have offended your majesty.”

“Not in the slightest degree in the world,” replied Louis XIV.

“I implore you, sire, not to maintain towards me that terrible
seriousness of manner which reveals your majesty’s just anger. I feel I
have offended you, sire; but I wish to explain to you how it was that I
have not offended you of my own accord.”

“In the first place,” said the king, “in what way can you possibly have
offended me? I cannot perceive how. Surely not on account of a young
girl’s harmless and very innocent jest? You turned the credulity of a
young man into ridicule--it was very natural to do so: any other woman
in your place would have done the same.”

“Oh! your majesty overwhelms me by your remark.”

“Why so?”

“Because, if I had been the author of the jest, it would not have been
innocent.”

“Well, is that all you had to say to me in soliciting an audience?” said
the king, as though about to turn away.

Thereupon La Valliere, in an abrupt and a broken voice, her eyes dried
up by the fire of her tears, made a step towards the king, and said,
“Did your majesty hear everything?”

“Everything, what?”

“Everything I said beneath the royal oak.”

“I did not lose a syllable.”

“And now, after your majesty really heard all, are you able to think I
abused your credibility?”

“Credulity; yes, indeed, you have selected the very word.”

“And your majesty did not suppose that a poor girl like myself might
possibly be compelled to submit to the will of others?”

“Forgive me,” returned the king; “but I shall never be able to
understand that she, who of her own free will could express herself so
unreservedly beneath the royal oak, would allow herself to be influenced
to such an extent by the direction of others.”

“But the threat held out against me, sire.”

“Threat! who threatened you--who dared to threaten you?”

“Those who have the right to do so, sire.”

“I do not recognize any one as possessing the right to threaten the
humblest of my subjects.”

“Forgive me, sire, but near your majesty, even, there are persons
sufficiently high in position to have, or to believe that they possess,
the right of injuring a young girl, without fortune, and possessing only
her reputation.”

“In what way injure her?”

“In depriving her of her reputation, by disgracefully expelling her from
the court.”

“Oh! Mademoiselle de la Valliere,” said the king bitterly, “I prefer
those persons who exculpate themselves without incriminating others.”

“Sire!”

“Yes; and I confess that I greatly regret to perceive, that an easy
justification, as your own would have been, is now complicated in my
presence by a tissue of reproaches and imputations against others.”

“And which you do not believe?” exclaimed La Valliere. The king remained
silent.

“Nay, but tell me!” repeated La Valliere, vehemently.

“I regret to confess it,” repeated the king, bowing coldly.

The young girl uttered a deep groan, striking her hands together in
despair. “You do not believe me, then,” she said to the king, who
still remained silent, while poor La Valliere’s features became visibly
changed at his continued silence. “Therefore, you believe,” she said,
“that I pre-arranged this ridiculous, this infamous plot, of trifling,
in so shameless a manner, with your majesty.”

“Nay,” said the king, “it was neither ridiculous nor infamous; it was
not even a plot; merely a jest, more or less amusing, and nothing more.”

“Oh!” murmured the young girl, “the king does not, and will not believe
me, then?”

“No, indeed, I will not believe you,” said the king. “Besides, in point
of fact, what can be more natural? The king, you argue, follows me,
listens to me, watches me; the king wishes perhaps to amuse himself
at my expense, I will amuse myself at his, and as the king is very
tender-hearted, I will take his heart by storm.”

La Valliere hid her face in her hands, as she stifled her sobs. The
king continued pitilessly; he was revenging himself upon the poor victim
before him for all he had himself suffered.

“Let us invent, then, this story of my loving him and preferring him to
others. The king is so simple and so conceited that he will believe me;
and then we can go and tell others how credulous the king is, and can
enjoy a laugh at his expense.”

“Oh!” exclaimed La Valliere, “you think that, you believe that!--it is
frightful.”

“And,” pursued the king, “that is not all; if this self-conceited prince
take our jest seriously, if he should be imprudent enough to exhibit
before others anything like delight at it, well, in that case, the king
will be humiliated before the whole court; and what a delightful story
it will be, too, for him to whom I am really attached, in fact part of
my dowry for my husband, to have the adventure to relate of the monarch
who was so amusingly deceived by a young girl.”

“Sire!” exclaimed La Valliere, her mind bewildered, almost wandering,
indeed, “not another word, I implore you; do you not see that you are
killing me?”

“A jest, nothing but a jest,” murmured the king, who, however, began to
be somewhat affected.

La Valliere fell upon her knees, and that so violently, that the sound
could be heard upon the hard floor. “Sire,” she said, “I prefer shame to
disloyalty.”

“What do you mean?” inquired the king, without moving a step to raise
the young girl from her knees.

“Sire, when I shall have sacrificed my honor and my reason both to you,
you will perhaps believe in my loyalty. The tale which was related to
you in Madame’s apartments, and by Madame herself, is utterly false; and
that which I said beneath the great oak--”

“Well!”

“That is the only truth.”

“What!” exclaimed the king.

“Sire,” exclaimed La Valliere, hurried away by the violence of her
emotions, “were I to die of shame on the very spot where my knees are
fixed, I would repeat it until my latest breath; I said that I loved
you, and it is true; I do love you.”

“You!”

“I have loved you, sire, from the very first day I ever saw you; from
the moment when at Blois, where I was pining away my existence, your
royal looks, full of light and life, were first bent upon me. I love
you still, sire; it is a crime of high treason, I know, that a poor girl
like myself should love her sovereign, and should presume to tell him
so. Punish me for my audacity, despise me for my shameless immodesty;
but do not ever say, do not ever think, that I have jested with or
deceived you. I belong to a family whose loyalty has been proved, sire,
and I, too, love my king.”

Suddenly her strength, voice, and respiration ceased, and she fell
forward, like the flower Virgil alludes to, which the scythe of the
reaper severed in the midst of the grass. The king, at these words, at
this vehement entreaty, no longer retained any ill-will or doubt in
his mind: his whole heart seemed to expand at the glowing breath of an
affection which proclaimed itself in such noble and courageous language.
When, therefore, he heard the passionate confession, his strength seemed
to fail him, and he hid his face in his hands. But when he felt La
Valliere’s hands clinging to his own, when their warm pressure fired his
blood, he bent forward, and passing his arm round La Valliere’s waist,
he raised her from the ground and pressed her against his heart. But
she, her drooping head fallen forward on her bosom, seemed to have
ceased to live. The king, terrified, called out for Saint-Aignan.
Saint-Aignan, who had carried his discretion so far as to remain without
stirring in his corner, pretending to wipe away a tear, ran forward at
the king’s summons. He then assisted Louis to seat the young girl upon
a couch, slapped her hands, sprinkled some Hungary water over her
face, calling out all the while, “Come, come, it is all over; the king
believes you, and forgives you. There, there now! take care, or you
will agitate his majesty too much; his majesty is so sensitive, so
tender-hearted. Now, really, Mademoiselle de la Valliere, you must pay
attention, for the king is very pale.”

The fact was, the king was visibly losing color. But La Valliere did not
move.

“Do pray recover,” continued Saint-Aignan. “I beg, I implore you; it is
really time you should; think only of one thing, that if the king should
become unwell, I should be obliged to summon his physician. What a state
of things that would be! So do pray rouse yourself; make an effort, pray
do, and do so at once, my dear.”

It was difficult to display more persuasive eloquence than Saint-Aignan
did, but something still more powerful, and of a more energetic nature
than this eloquence, aroused La Valliere. The king, who was kneeling
before her, covered the palms of her hands with those burning kisses
which are to the hands what a kiss upon the lips is to the face. La
Valliere’s senses returned to her; she languidly opened her eyes and,
with a dying look, murmured, “Oh! sire, has your majesty pardoned me,
then?”

The king did not reply, for he was still too much overcome. Saint-Aignan
thought it was his duty again to retire, for he observed the passionate
devotion which was displayed in the king’s gaze. La Valliere rose.

“And now, sire, that I have justified myself, at least I trust so, in
your majesty’s eyes, grant me leave to retire into a convent. I shall
bless your majesty all my life, and I shall die thanking and loving
Heaven for having granted me one hour of perfect happiness.”

“No, no,” replied the king, “you will live here blessing Heaven, on the
contrary, but loving Louis, who will make your existence one of perfect
felicity--Louis who loves you--Louis who swears it.”

“Oh! sire, sire!”

And upon this doubt of La Valliere, the king’s kisses became so warm
that Saint-Aignan thought it was his duty to retire behind the tapestry.
These kisses, however, which she had not the strength at first to
resist, began to intimidate the young girl.

“Oh! sire,” she exclaimed, “do not make me repeat my loyalty, for this
would show me that your majesty despises me still.”

“Mademoiselle de la Valliere,” said the king, suddenly, drawing back
with an air full of respect, “there is nothing in the world that I love
and honor more than yourself, and nothing in my court, I call Heaven
to witness, shall be so highly regarded as you shall be henceforward.
I entreat your forgiveness for my transport; it arose from an excess
of affection, but I can prove to you that I love you more than ever by
respecting you as much as you can possibly desire or deserve.” Then,
bending before her, and taking her by the hand, he said to her, “Will
you honor me by accepting the kiss I press upon your hand?” And the
king’s lips were pressed respectfully and lightly upon the young girl’s
trembling hand. “Henceforth,” added Louis, rising and bending his glance
upon La Valliere, “henceforth you are under my safeguard. Do not speak
to any one of the injury I have done you, forgive others that which they
may have attempted. For the future, you shall be so far above all those,
that, far from inspiring you with fear, they shall be even beneath your
pity.” And he bowed as reverently as though he were leaving a place
of worship. Then calling to Saint-Aignan, who approached with great
humility, he said, “I hope, comte, that Mademoiselle de la Valliere will
kindly confer a little of her friendship upon you, in return for that
which I have vowed to her eternally.”

Saint-Aignan bent his knee before La Valliere, saying, “How happy,
indeed, would such an honor make me!”

“I will send your companion back to you,” said the king. “Farewell! or,
rather, adieu till we meet again; do not forget me in your prayers, I
entreat.”

“Oh!” cried La Valliere, “be assured that you and Heaven are in my heart
together.”

These words of Louise elated the king, who, full of happiness,
hurried Saint-Aignan down the stairs. Madame had not anticipated this
_denouement_; and neither the Naiad nor the Dryad had breathed a word
about it.



Chapter LX. The New General of the Jesuits.

While La Valliere and the king were mingling, in their first confession
of love, all the bitterness of the past, the happiness of the present,
and hopes of the future, Fouquet had retired to the apartments which
had been assigned to him in the chateau, and was conversing with Aramis
precisely upon the very subjects which the king at that moment was
forgetting.

“Now tell me,” said Fouquet, after having installed his guest in an
armchair and seated himself by his side, “tell me, Monsieur d’Herblay,
what is our position with regard to the Belle-Isle affair, and whether
you have received any news about it.”

“Everything is going on in that direction as we wish,” replied Aramis;
“the expenses have been paid, and nothing has transpired of our
designs.”

“But what about the soldiers the king wished to send there?”

“I have received news this morning they arrived there fifteen days ago.”

“And how have they been treated?”

“In the best manner possible.”

“What has become of the former garrison?”

“The soldiers were landed at Sarzeau, and then transferred immediately
to Quimper.”

“And the new garrison?”

“Belongs to us from this very moment.”

“Are you sure of what you say, my dear Monsieur de Vannes?”

“Quite sure, and, moreover, you will see by and by how matters have
turned out.”

“Still you are very well aware, that, of all the garrison towns,
Belle-Isle is precisely the very worst.”

“I know it, and have acted accordingly; no space to move about, no
gayety, no cheerful society, no gambling permitted: well, it is a great
pity,” added Aramis, with one of those smiles so peculiar to him, “to
see how much young people at the present day seek amusement, and how
much, consequently, they incline to the man who procures and pays for
their favorite pastimes.”

“But if they amuse themselves at Bell-Isle?”

“If they amuse themselves through the king’s means, they will attach
themselves to the king; but if they get bored to death through the
king’s means, and amuse themselves through M. Fouquet, they will attach
themselves to M. Fouquet.”

“And you informed my intendant, of course?--so that immediately on their
arrival--”

“By no means; they were left alone a whole week, to weary themselves
at their ease; but, at the end of the week, they cried out, saying that
former officers amused themselves much better. Whereupon they were told
that the old officers had been able to make a friend of M. Fouquet, and
that M. Fouquet, knowing them to be friends of his, had from that moment
done all he possibly could to prevent their getting wearied or
bored upon his estates. Upon this they began to reflect. Immediately
afterwards, however, the intendant added, that without anticipating M.
Fouquet’s orders, he knew his master sufficiently well to be aware that
he took an interest in every gentleman in the king’s service, and that,
although he did not know the new-comers, he would do as much for them as
he had done for the others.”

“Excellent! and I trust that the promises were followed up; I desire, as
you know, that no promise should ever be made in my name without being
kept.”

“Without a moment’s loss of time, our two privateers, and your own
horses, were placed at the disposal of the officers; the keys of
the principal mansion were handed over to them, so that they made up
hunting-parties, and walking excursions with such ladies as are to be
found in Belle-Isle; and such other as they are enabled to enlist from
the neighborhood, who have no fear of sea-sickness.”

“And there is a fair sprinkling to be met with at Sarzeau and Vannes, I
believe, your eminence?”

“Yes; in fact all along the coast,” said Aramis, quietly.

“And now, how about the soldiers?”

“Everything precisely the same, in a relative degree, you understand;
the soldiers have plenty of wine, excellent provisions, and good pay.”

“Very good; so that--”

“So that this garrison can be depended upon, and it is a better one than
the last.”

“Good.”

“The result is, if Fortune favors us, so that the garrisons are changed
in this manner, only every two months, that, at the end of every
three years, the whole army will, in its turn, have been there; and,
therefore, instead of having one regiment in our favor, we shall have
fifty thousand men.”

“Yes, yes; I knew perfectly well,” said Fouquet, “that no friend could
be more incomparable and invaluable than yourself, my dear Monsieur
d’Herblay; but,” he added, laughing, “all this time we are forgetting
our friend, Du Vallon; what has become of him? During the three days I
spent at Saint-Mande, I confess I have forgotten him completely.”

“I do not forget him, however,” returned Aramis. “Porthos is at
Saint-Mande; his joints are kept well greased, the greatest care is
being taken care of him with regard to the food he eats, and the wines
he drinks; I advise him to take daily airings in the small park, which
you have kept for your own use, and he makes us of it accordingly. He
begins to walk again, he exercises his muscular powers by bending down
young elm-trees, or making the old oaks fly into splinters, as Milo of
Crotona used to do; and, as there are no lions in the park, it is not
unlikely we shall find him alive. Porthos is a brave fellow.”

“Yes, but in the mean time he will get bored to death.”

“Oh, no; he never does that.”

“He will be asking questions?”

“He sees no one.”

“At all events, he is looking or hoping for something or another.”

“I have inspired in him a hope which we will realize some fine morning,
and on that he subsists.”

“What is it?”

“That of being presented to the king.”

“Oh! in what character?”

“As the engineer of Belle-Isle, of course.”

“Is it possible?”

“Quite true.”

“Shall we not be obliged, then, to send him back to Belle-Isle?”

“Most certainly; I am even thinking of sending him as soon as possible.
Porthos is very fond of display; he is man whose weakness D’Artagnan,
Athos, and myself are alone acquainted with; he never commits himself
in any way; he is dignity himself; to the officers there, he would seem
like a Paladin of the time of the Crusades. He would make the whole
staff drunk, without getting tipsy in the least himself, and every one
will regard him with admiration and sympathy; if, therefore, it should
happen that we have any orders requiring to be carried out, Porthos is
an incarnation of the order itself, and whatever he chose to do others
would find themselves obliged to submit to.”

“Send him back, then.”

“That is what I intend to do; but only in a few days; for I must not
omit to tell you one thing.”

“What is it?”

“I begin to mistrust D’Artagnan. He is not at Fontainebleau, as you
may have noticed, and D’Artagnan is never absent, or apparently idle,
without some object in view. And now that my own affairs are settled, I
am going to try and ascertain what the affairs are in which D’Artagnan
is engaged.”

“Your own affairs are settled, you say?”

“Yes.”

“You are very fortunate in that case, then, and I should like to be able
to say the same.”

“I hope you do not make yourself uneasy.”

“Hum!”

“Nothing could be better than the king’s reception of you.”

“True.”

“And Colbert leaves you in peace.”

“Nearly so.”

“In that case,” said Aramis, with that connection of ideas which marked
him, “in that case, then, we can bestow a thought upon the young girl I
was speaking to you about yesterday.”

“Whom do you mean?”

“What, have you forgotten already? I mean La Valliere.”

“Ah! of course, of course.”

“Do you object, then, to try and make a conquest of her?”

“In one respect only; my heart is engaged in another direction, and I
positively do not care about the girl in the least.”

“Oh, oh!” said Aramis, “your heart is engaged, you say. The deuce! we
must take care of that.”

“Why?”

“Because it is terrible to have the heart occupied, when others, besides
yourself, have so much need of the head.”

“You are right. So you see, at your first summons, I left everything.
But to return to this girl. What good do you see in my troubling myself
about her?”

“This.--The king, it is said, has taken a fancy to her; at least, so it
is supposed.”

“But you, who know everything, know very differently.”

“I know that the king is greatly and suddenly changed; that the day
before yesterday he was crazy over Madame; that a few days ago, Monsieur
complained of it, even to the queen-mother; and that some conjugal
misunderstandings and maternal scoldings were the consequence.”

“How do you know all that?”

“I do know it; at all events, since these misunderstandings and
scoldings, the king has not addressed a word, has not paid the slightest
attention, to her royal highness.”

“Well, what next?”

“Since then, he has been taken up with Mademoiselle de la Valliere.
Now, Mademoiselle de la Valliere is one of Madame’s maids of honor. You
happen to know, I suppose, what is called a _chaperon_ in matters of
love. Well, then, Mademoiselle de la Valliere is Madame’s _chaperon_.
It is for you to take advantage of this state of things. You have no
occasion for me to tell you that. But, at all events, wounded vanity
will render the conquest an easier one; the girl will get hold of the
king, and Madame’s secret, and you can scarcely predict what a man of
intelligence can do with a secret.”

“But how to get at her?”

“Nay, you, of all men, to ask me such a question!” said Aramis.

“Very true. I shall not have any time to take any notice of her.”

“She is poor and unassuming, you will create a position for her, and
whether she tames the king as his lady confessor, or his sweetheart, you
will have enlisted a new and valuable ally.”

“Very good,” said Fouquet. “What is to be done, then, with regard to
this girl?”

“Whenever you have taken a fancy to any lady, Monsieur Fouquet, what
course have you generally pursued?”

“I have written to her, protesting my devotion to her. I have added, how
happy I should be to render her any service in my power, and have signed
‘Fouquet,’ at the end of the letter.”

“And has any one offered resistance?”

“One person only,” replied Fouquet. “But, four days ago, she yielded, as
the others had done.”

“Will you take the trouble to write?” said Aramis, holding a pen towards
him, which Fouquet took, saying:

“I will write at your dictation. My head is so taken up in another
direction, that I should not be able to write a couple lines.”

“Very well,” said Aramis, “write.”

And he dictated, as follows: “Mademoiselle--I have seen you--and you
will not be surprised to learn, I think you very beautiful. But, for
want of the position you merit at court, your presence there is a waste
of time. The devotion of a man of honor, should ambition of any kind
inspire you, might possibly serve as a means of display for your talent
and beauty. I place my devotion at your feet; but, as an affection,
however reserved and unpresuming it may be, might possibly compromise
the object of its worship, it would ill become a person of your merit
running the risk of being compromised, without her future being assured.
If you would deign to accept, and reply to my affection, my affection
shall prove its gratitude to you in making you free and independent
forever.”

Having finished writing, Fouquet looked at Aramis.

“Sign it,” said the latter.

“Is it absolutely necessary?”

“Your signature at the foot of that letter is worth a million; you
forget that.” Fouquet signed.

“Now, by whom do you intend to send this letter?” asked Aramis.

“By an excellent servant of mine.”

“Can you rely on him?”

“He is a man who has been with me all my life.”

“Very well. Besides, in this case, we are not playing for very heavy
stakes.”

“How so? For if what you say be true of the accommodating disposition of
this girl for the king and Madame, the king will give her all the money
she can ask for.”

“The king has money, then?” asked Aramis.

“I suppose so, for he has not asked me for any more.”

“Be easy, he will ask for some, soon.”

“Nay, more than that, I had thought he would have spoken to me about the
_fete_ at Vaux, but he never said a word about it.”

“He will be sure to do so, though.”

“You must think the king’s disposition a very cruel one, Monsieur
d’Herblay.”

“It is not he who is so.”

“He is young, and therefore his disposition is a kind one.”

“He is young, and either he is weak, or his passions are strong; and
Monsieur Colbert holds his weakness and his passions in his villainous
grasp.”

“You admit that you fear him?”

“I do not deny it.”

“I that case I am lost.”

“Why so?”

“My only influence with the king has been through the money I commanded,
and now I am a ruined man.”

“Not so.”

“What do you mean by ‘not so?’ Do you know my affairs better than
myself?”

“That is not unlikely.”

“If he were to request this _fete_ to be given?”

“You would give it, of course.”

“But where is the money to come from?”

“Have you ever been in want of any?”

“Oh! if you only knew at what a cost I procured the last supply.”

“The next shall cost you nothing.”

“But who will give it me?”

“I will.”

“What, give me six millions?”

“Ten, if necessary.”

“Upon my word, D’Herblay,” said Fouquet, “your confidence alarms me more
than the king’s displeasure. Who can you possibly be, after all?”

“You know me well enough, I should think.”

“Of course; but what is it you are aiming at?”

“I wish to see upon the throne of France a king devoted to Monsieur
Fouquet, and I wish Monsieur Fouquet to be devoted to me.”

“Oh!” exclaimed Fouquet, pressing his hand,--“as for being devoted to
you, I am yours, entirely; but believe me, my dear D’Herblay, you are
deceiving yourself.”

“In what respect?”

“The king will never become devoted to me.”

“I do not remember to have said that King Louis would ever become
devoted to you.”

“Why, on the contrary, you have this moment said so.”

“I did not say _the_ king; I said _a_ king.”

“Is it not all the same?”

“No, on the contrary, it is altogether different.”

“I do not understand you.”

“You will do so, shortly, then; suppose, for instance, the king in
question were to be a very different person to Louis XIV.”

“Another person.”

“Yes, who is indebted for everything to you.”

“Impossible.”

“His very throne, even.”

“You are mad, D’Herblay. There is no man living besides Louis XIV. who
can sit on the throne of France. I know of none, not one.”

“_But_ I know one.”

“Unless it be Monsieur,” said Fouquet, looking at Aramis uneasily; “yet
Monsieur--”

“It is _not_ Monsieur.”

“But how can it be, that a prince not of the royal line, that a prince
without any right--”

“My king, or rather your king, will be everything that is necessary, be
assured of that.”

“Be careful, Monsieur d’Herblay, you make my blood run cold, and my head
swim.”

Aramis smiled. “There is but little occasion for that,” he replied.

“Again, I repeat, you terrify me,” said Fouquet. Aramis smiled.

“You laugh,” said Fouquet.

“The day will come when you will laugh too; only at the present moment I
must laugh alone.”

“But explain yourself.”

“When the proper time comes, I will explain all. Fear nothing. Have
faith in me, and doubt nothing.”

“The fact is, I cannot but doubt, because I do not see clearly, or even
at all.”

“That is because of your blindness; but a day will come when you will be
enlightened.”

“Oh!” said Fouquet, “how willingly would I believe.”

“You, without belief! you, who, through my means, have ten times crossed
the abyss yawning at your feet, and in which, had you been alone, you
would have been irretrievably swallowed; you, without belief; you, who
from procureur-general attained the rank of intendant, from the rank
of intendant, that of the first minister of the crown, and who from the
rank of first minister will pass to that of mayor of the palace. But
no,” he said, with the same unaltered smile, “no, no, you cannot see,
and consequently cannot believe--what I tell you.” And Aramis rose to
withdraw.

“One word more,” said Fouquet; “you have never yet spoken to me in this
manner, you have never yet shown yourself so confident, I should rather
say so daring.”

“Because it is necessary, in order to speak confidently, to have the
lips unfettered.”

“And that is now your case?”

“Yes.”

“Since a very short time, then?”

“Since yesterday, only.”

“Oh! Monsieur d’Herblay, take care, your confidence is becoming
audacity.”

“One can well be audacious when one is powerful.”

“And you are powerful?”

“I have already offered you ten millions; I repeat the offer.”

Fouquet rose, profoundly agitated.

“Come,” he said, “come; you spoke of overthrowing kings and replacing
them by others. If, indeed, I am not really out of my senses, is or is
not that what you said just now?”

“You are by no means out of your senses, for it is perfectly true I did
say all that just now.”

“And why did you say so?”

“Because it is easy to speak in this manner of thrones being cast down,
and kings being raised up, when one is, one’s self, far above all kings
and thrones, of this world at least.”

“Your power is infinite, then?” cried Fouquet.

“I have told you so already, and I repeat it,” replied Aramis, with
glistening eyes and trembling lips.

Fouquet threw himself back in his chair, and buried his face in
his hands. Aramis looked at him for a moment, as the angel of human
destinies might have looked upon a simple mortal.

“Adieu,” he said to him, “sleep undisturbed, and send your letter to La
Valliere. To-morrow we shall see each other again.”

“Yes, to-morrow,” said Fouquet, shaking his hands like a man returning
to his senses. “But where shall we see each other?”

“At the king’s promenade, if you like.”

“Agreed.” And they separated.



Chapter LXI. The Storm.

The dawn of the following day was dark and gloomy, and as every one knew
that the promenade was down in the royal programme, every one’s gaze, as
his eyes were opened, was directed towards the sky. Just above the tops
of the trees a thick, suffocating vapor seemed to remain suspended, with
barely sufficient power to rise thirty feet above the ground under the
influence of the sun’s rays, which was scarcely visible as a faint spot
of lesser darkness through the veil of heavy mist. No dew had fallen
in the morning; the turf was dried up for want of moisture, the flowers
withered. The birds sang less inspiringly than usual upon the boughs,
which remained motionless as the limbs of corpses. The strange confused
and animated murmurs, which seemed born and to exist in virtue of the
sun, that respiration of nature which is unceasingly heard amidst all
other sounds, could not be heard now, and never had the silence been so
profound.

The king had noticed the cheerless aspect of the heavens as he
approached the window immediately upon rising. But as all the
necessary directions had been given respecting the promenade, and
every preparation had been made accordingly, and as, which was far
more imperious than anything else, Louis relied upon this promenade to
satisfy the cravings of his imagination, and we will even already say,
the clamorous desires of his heart--the king unhesitatingly decided
that the appearance of the heavens had nothing whatever to do with the
matter; that the promenade was arranged, and that, whatever the state of
the weather, the promenade should take place. Besides, there are
certain terrestrial sovereigns who seem to have accorded them privileged
existences, and there are certain times when it might almost be supposed
that the expressed wish of an earthly monarch has its influence over the
Divine will. It was Virgil who observed of Augustus: _Nocte pluit tota
redeunt spectacula mane_. [10]

Louis attended mass as usual, but it was evident that his attention was
somewhat distracted from the presence of the Creator by the remembrance
of the creature. His mind was occupied during the service in reckoning
more than once the number of minutes, then of seconds, which separated
him from the blissful moment when the promenade would begin, that is
to say, the moment when Madame would set out with her maids of honor.
Besides, as a matter of course, everybody at the chateau was ignorant
of the interview which had taken place between La Valliere and the king.
Montalais, perhaps, with her usual chattering propensity, might have
been disposed to talk about it; but Montalais on this occasion was held
in check by Malicorne, who had securely fastened on her pretty lips the
golden padlock of mutual interest. As for Louis XIV., his happiness was
so extreme that he had forgiven Madame, or nearly so, her little
piece of malice of the previous evening. In fact, he had occasion to
congratulate himself rather than to complain of it. Had it not been for
her ill-natured action, he would not have received the letter from
La Valliere; had it not been for the letter, he would have had no
interview; and had it not been for the interview he would have remained
undecided. His heart was filled with too much happiness for any
ill-feeling to remain in it, at that moment at least. Instead,
therefore, of knitting his brows into a frown when he perceived his
sister-in-law, Louis resolved to receive her in a more friendly and
gracious manner than usual. But on one condition only, that she would be
ready to set out early. Such was the nature of Louis’s thoughts during
mass; which made him, during the ceremony, forget matters which, in his
character of Most Christian King and of the eldest son of the Church,
ought to have occupied his attention. He returned to the chateau, and
as the promenade was fixed for midday, and it was at present just ten
o’clock, he set to work desperately with Colbert and Lyonne. But even
while he worked Louis went from the table to the window, inasmuch as the
window looked out upon Madame’s pavilion: he could see M. Fouquet in the
courtyard, to whom the courtiers, since the favor shown towards him
on the previous evening, paid greater attention than ever. The king,
instinctively, on noticing Fouquet, turned towards Colbert, who was
smiling, and seemed full of benevolence and delight, a state of feeling
which had arisen from the very moment one of his secretaries had entered
and handed him a pocket-book, which he had put unopened into his pocket.
But, as there was always something sinister at the bottom of any delight
expressed by Colbert, Louis preferred, of the smiles of the two men,
that of Fouquet. He beckoned to the superintendent to come up, and
turning towards Lyonne and Colbert, he said:--“Finish this matter, place
it on my desk, and I will read it at my leisure.” And he left the
room. At the sign the king had made to him, Fouquet had hastened up
the staircase, while Aramis, who was with the superintendent, quietly
retired among the group of courtiers and disappeared without having been
even observed by the king. The king and Fouquet met at the top of the
staircase.

“Sire,” said Fouquet, remarking the gracious manner in which Louis was
about to receive him, “your majesty has overwhelmed me with kindness
during the last few days. It is not a youthful monarch, but a being of
higher order, who reigns over France, one whom pleasure, happiness, and
love acknowledge as their master.” The king colored. The compliment,
although flattering, was not the less somewhat pointed. Louis
conducted Fouquet to a small room that divided his study from his
sleeping-apartment.

“Do you know why I summoned you?” said the king as he seated himself
upon the edge of the window, so as not to lose anything that might be
passing in the gardens which fronted the opposite entrance to Madame’s
pavilion.

“No, sire,” replied Fouquet, “but I am sure for something agreeable, if
I am to judge from your majesty’s gracious smile.”

“You are mistaken, then.”

“I, sire?”

“For I summoned you, on the contrary, to pick a quarrel with you.”

“With me, sire?”

“Yes: and that a serious one.”

“Your majesty alarms me--and yet I was most confident in your justice
and goodness.”

“Do you know I am told, Monsieur Fouquet, that you are preparing a grand
_fete_ at Vaux.”

Fouquet smiled, as a sick man would do at the first shiver of a fever
which has left him but returns again.

“And that you have not invited me!” continued the king.

“Sire,” replied Fouquet, “I have not even thought of the _fete_ you
speak of, and it was only yesterday evening that one of my _friends_,”
 Fouquet laid a stress upon the word, “was kind enough to make me think
of it.”

“Yet I saw you yesterday evening, Monsieur Fouquet, and you said nothing
to me about it.”

“How dared I hope that your majesty would so greatly descend from your
own exalted station as to honor my dwelling with your royal presence?”


“Excuse me, Monsieur Fouquet, you did not speak to me about your
_fete_.”

“I did not allude to the _fete_ to your majesty, I repeat, in the
first place, because nothing had been decided with regard to it, and,
secondly, because I feared a refusal.”

“And something made you fear a refusal, Monsieur Fouquet? You see I am
determined to push you hard.”

“The profound wish I had that your majesty should accept my
invitation--”

“Well, Monsieur Fouquet, nothing is easier, I perceive, than our coming
to an understanding. Your wish is to invite me to your _fete_, my own is
to be present at it; invite me and I will go.”

“Is it possible that your majesty will deign to accept?” murmured the
superintendent.

“Why, really, monsieur,” said the king, laughing, “I think I do more
than accept; I rather fancy I am inviting myself.”

“Your majesty overwhelms me with honor and delight,” exclaimed Fouquet,
“but I shall be obliged to repeat what M. Vieuville said to your
ancestor, Henry IV., _Domine non sum dignus_.” [11]

“To which I reply, Monsieur Fouquet, that if you give a _fete_, I will
go, whether I am invited or not.”

“I thank your majesty deeply,” said Fouquet, as he raised his head
beneath this favor, which he was convinced would be his ruin.

“But how could your majesty have been informed of it?”

“By a public rumor, Monsieur Fouquet, which says such wonderful things
of yourself and the marvels of your house. Would you become proud,
Monsieur Fouquet, if the king were to be jealous of you?”

“I should be the happiest man in the world, sire, since the very day
on which your majesty were to be jealous of Vaux, I should possess
something worthy of being offered to you.”

“Very well, Monsieur Fouquet, prepare your _fete_, and open the door of
your house as wide as possible.”

“It is for your majesty to fix the day.”

“This day month, then.”

“Has your majesty any further commands?”

“Nothing, Monsieur Fouquet, except from the present moment until then to
have you near me as much as possible.”

“I have the honor to form one of your majesty’s party for the
promenade.”

“Very good; indeed, I am now setting out; for there are the ladies, I
see, who are going to start.”

With this remark, the king, with all the eagerness, not only of a young
man, but of a young man in love, withdrew from the window, in order
to take his gloves and cane, which his valet held ready for him. The
neighing of the horses and the crunching of the wheels on the gravel of
the courtyard could be distinctly heard. The king descended the stairs,
and at the moment he appeared upon the flight of steps, every
one stopped. The king walked straight up to the young queen. The
queen-mother, who was still suffering more than ever from the illness
with which she was afflicted, did not wish to go out. Maria Theresa
accompanied Madame in her carriage, and asked the king in what direction
he wished the promenade to drive. The king, who had just seen La
Valliere, still pale from the event of the previous evening, get into
a carriage with three of her companions, told the queen that he had no
preference, and wherever she would like to go, there would he be with
her. The queen then desired that the outriders should proceed in the
direction of Apremont. The outriders set off accordingly before the
others. The king rode on horseback, and for a few minutes accompanied
the carriage of the queen and Madame. The weather had cleared up a
little, but a kind of veil of dust, like a thick gauze, was still spread
over the surface of the heavens, and the sun made every atom glisten
within the circuit of its rays. The heat was stifling; but, as the king
did not seem to pay any attention to the appearance of the heavens, no
one made himself uneasy about it, and the promenade, in obedience to the
orders given by the queen, took its course in the direction of Apremont.
The courtiers who followed were in the very highest spirits; it was
evident that every one tried to forget, and to make others forget, the
bitter discussions of the previous evening. Madame, particularly, was
delightful. In fact, seeing the king at the door of her carriage, as she
did not suppose he would be there for the queen’s sake, she hoped that
her prince had returned to her. Hardly, however, had they proceeded a
quarter of a mile on the road, when the king, with a gracious smile,
saluted them and drew up his horse, leaving the queen’s carriage to pass
on, then that of the principal ladies of honor, and then all the others
in succession, who, seeing the king stop, wished in their turn to stop
too; but the king made a sign to them to continue their progress. When
La Valliere’s carriage passed, the king approached it, saluted the
ladies who were inside, and was preparing to accompany the carriage
containing the maids of honor, in the same way he had followed that in
which Madame was, when suddenly the whole file of carriages stopped. It
was probable that Madame, uneasy at the king having left her, had just
given directions for the performance of this maneuver, the direction in
which the promenade was to take place having been left to her. The king,
having sent to inquire what her object was in stopping the cavalcade,
was informed in reply, that she wished to walk. She most likely hoped
that the king, who was following the carriages of the maids of honor on
horseback, would not venture to follow the maids of honor themselves on
foot. They had arrived in the middle of the forest.

The promenade, in fact, was not ill-timed, especially for those who were
dreamers or lovers. From the little open space where the halt had taken
place, three beautiful long walks, shady and undulating, stretched out
before them. These walks were covered with moss or with leaves that
formed a carpet from the loom of nature; and each walk had its horizon
in the distance, consisting of about a hand-breadth of sky, apparent
through the interlacing of the branches of the trees. At the end of
almost every walk, evidently in great tribulation and uneasiness, the
startled deer were seen hurrying to and fro, first stopping for a moment
in the middle of the path, and then raising their heads they fled with
the speed of an arrow or bounded into the depths of the forest, where
they disappeared from view; now and then a rabbit, of philosophical
mien, might be noticed quietly sitting upright, rubbing his muzzle
with his fore paws, and looking about inquiringly, as though wondering
whether all these people, who were approaching in his direction, and
who had just disturbed him in his meditations and his meal, were not
followed by their dogs, or had not their guns under their arms. All
alighted from their carriages as soon as they observed that the queen
was doing so. Maria Theresa took the arm of one of her ladies of honor,
and, with a side glance towards the king, who did not perceive that he
was in the slightest degree the object of the queen’s attention, entered
the forest by the first path before her. Two of the outriders preceded
her majesty with long poles, which they used for the purpose of putting
the branches of the trees aside, or removing the bushes that might
impede her progress. As soon as Madame alighted, she found the Comte
de Guiche at her side, who bowed and placed himself at her disposal.
Monsieur, delighted with his bath of the two previous days, had
announced his preference for the river, and, having given De Guiche
leave of absence, remained at the chateau with the Chevalier de Lorraine
and Manicamp. He was not in the slightest degree jealous. He had been
looked for to no purpose among those present; but as Monsieur was a man
who thought a great deal of himself, and usually added very little to
the general pleasure, his absence was rather a subject of satisfaction
than regret. Every one had followed the example which the queen and
Madame had set, doing just as they pleased, according as chance or fancy
influenced them. The king, we have already observed, remained near La
Valliere, and, throwing himself off his horse at the moment the door of
her carriage was opened, he offered her his hand to alight. Montalais
and Tonnay-Charente immediately drew back and kept at a distance; the
former from calculated, the latter from natural motives. There was this
difference, however, between the two, that the one had withdrawn from
a wish to please the king, the other for a very opposite reason. During
the last half-hour the weather also had undergone a change; the veil
which had been spread over the sky, as if driven by a blast of heated
air, had become massed together in the western part of the heavens;
and afterwards, as if driven by a current of air from the opposite
direction, was now advancing slowly and heavily towards them. The
approach of the storm could be felt, but as the king did not perceive
it, no one thought it proper to do so. The promenade was therefore
continued; some of the company, with minds ill at ease on the subject,
raised their eyes from time to time towards the sky; others, even more
timid still, walked about without wandering too far from the carriages,
where they relied upon taking shelter in case the storm burst. The
greater number of these, however, observing that the king fearlessly
entered the wood with La Valliere, followed his majesty. The king,
noticing this, took La Valliere’s hand, and led her to a lateral
forest-alley; where no one this time ventured to follow him.



Chapter LXII. The Shower of Rain.

At this moment, and in the same direction, too, that the king and La
Valliere had taken, except that they were in the wood itself instead of
following the path, two men were walking together, utterly indifferent
to the appearance of the heavens. Their heads were bent down in the
manner of people occupied with matters of great moment. They had not
observed either De Guiche or Madame, the king or La Valliere. Suddenly
something fell through the air like a colossal sheet of flame, followed
by a loud but distant rumbling noise.

“Ah!” said one of them, raising his head, “here comes the storm. Let us
reach our carriages, my dear D’Herblay.”

Aramis looked inquiringly at the heavens. “There is no occasion to hurry
yet,” he said; and then resuming the conversation where it had doubtless
been interrupted, he said, “You were observing that the letter we wrote
last evening must by this time have reached its destination?”

“I was saying that she certainly has it.”

“Whom did you send it by?”

“By my own servant, as I have already told you.”

“Did he bring back an answer?”

“I have not seen him since; the young girl was probably in attendance
on Madame, or was in her own room dressing, and he may have had to
wait. Our time for leaving arrived, and we set off, of course; I cannot,
therefore, know what is going on yonder.”

“Did you see the king before leaving?”

“Yes.”

“How did he seem?”

“Nothing could have passed off better, or worse; according as he be
sincere or hypocritical.”

“And the _fete?_”

“Will take place in a month.”

“He invited himself, you say?”

“With a pertinacity in which I detected Colbert’s influence. But has not
last night removed your illusions?”

“What illusions?”

“With respect to the assistance you may be able to give me under these
circumstances.”

“No; I have passed the night writing, and all my orders are given.”

“Do not conceal it from yourself, D’Herblay, but the _fete_ will cost
some millions.”

“I will supply six; do you on your side get two or three.”

“You are a wonderful man, my dear D’Herblay.”

Aramis smiled.

“But,” inquired Fouquet, with some remaining uneasiness, “how is it that
while you are now squandering millions in this manner, a few days ago
you did not pay the fifty thousand francs to Baisemeaux out of your own
pocket?”

“Because a few days ago I was as poor as Job.”

“And to-day?”

“To-day I am wealthier than the king himself.”

“Very well,” said Fouquet; “I understand men pretty well; I know you are
incapable of forfeiting your word; I do not wish to wrest your secret
from you, and so let us talk no more about it.”

At this moment a dull, heavy rumbling was heard, which suddenly
developed into a violent clap of thunder.

“Oh, oh!” said Fouquet, “I was quite right in what I said.”

“Come,” said Aramis, “let us rejoin the carriages.”

“We shall not have time,” said Fouquet, “for here comes the rain.”

In fact, as he spoke, and as if the heavens were opened, a shower of
large drops of rain was suddenly heard pattering on the leaves about
them.

“We shall have time,” said Aramis, “to reach the carriages before the
foliage becomes saturated.”

“It will be better,” said Fouquet, “to take shelter somewhere--in a
grotto, for instance.”

“Yes, but where are we to find a grotto?” inquired Aramis.

“I know one,” said Fouquet, smiling, “not ten paces from here.” Then
looking round him, he added: “Yes, we are quite right.”

“You are very fortunate to have so good a memory,” said Aramis, smiling
in his turn, “but are you not afraid that your coachman, finding we do
not return, will suppose we have taken another road back, and that he
will not follow the carriages belonging to the court?”

“Oh, there is no fear of that,” said Fouquet; “whenever I place my
coachman and my carriage in any particular spot, nothing but an express
order from the king could stir them; and more than that, too, it seems
that we are not the only ones who have come so far, for I hear footsteps
and the sound of voices.”

As he spoke, Fouquet turned round, and opened with his cane a mass of
foliage which hid the path from his view. Aramis’s glance as well as his
own plunged at the same moment through the aperture he had made.

“A woman,” said Aramis.

“And a man,” said Fouquet.

“It is La Valliere and the king,” they both exclaimed together.

“Oh, oh!” said Aramis, “is his majesty aware of your cavern as well?
I should not be astonished if he were, for he seems to be on very good
terms with the dryads of Fontainebleau.”

“Never mind,” said Fouquet; “let us get there. If he is not aware of
it, we shall see what he will do if he should know it, as it has two
entrances, so that whilst he enters by one, we can leave by the other.”

“Is it far?” asked Aramis, “for the rain is beginning to penetrate.”

“We are there now,” said Fouquet, as he pushed aside a few branches, and
an excavation in the solid rock could be observed, hitherto concealed by
heaths, ivy, and a thick covert of small shrubs.

Fouquet led the way, followed by Aramis; but as the latter entered the
grotto, he turned round, saying: “Yes, they are entering the wood; and,
see, they are bending their steps this way.”

“Very well; let us make room for them,” said Fouquet, smiling and
pulling Aramis by his cloak; “but I do not think the king knows of my
grotto.”

“Yes,” said Aramis, “they are looking about them, but it is only for a
thicker tree.”

Aramis was not mistaken, the king’s looks were directed upward, and not
around him. He held La Valliere’s arm within his own, and held her hand
in his. La Valliere’s feet began to sleep on the damp grass. Louis again
looked round him with greater attention than before, and perceiving an
enormous oak with wide-spreading branches, he hurriedly drew La Valliere
beneath its protecting shelter. The poor girl looked round her on all
sides, and seemed half afraid, half desirous of being followed. The
king made her lean back against the trunk of the tree, whose vast
circumference, protected by the thickness of the foliage, was as dry as
if at that moment the rain had not been falling in torrents. He himself
remained standing before her with his head uncovered. After a few
minutes, however, some drops of rain penetrated through the branches of
the tree and fell on the king’s forehead, who did not pay any attention
to them.

“Oh, sire!” murmured La Valliere, pushing the king’s hat towards him.
But the king simply bowed, and determinedly refused to cover his head.

“Now or never is the time to offer your place,” said Fouquet in Aramis’s
ear.

“Now or never is the time to listen, and not lose a syllable of what
they may have to say to each other,” replied Aramis in Fouquet’s ear.

In fact they both remained perfectly silent, and the king’s voice
reached them where they were.

“Believe me,” said the king, “I perceive, or rather I can imagine your
uneasiness; believe me, I sincerely regret having isolated you from the
rest of the company, and brought you, also, to a spot where you will be
inconvenienced by the rain. You are wet already, and perhaps cold too?”

“No, sire.”

“And yet you tremble?”

“I am afraid, sire, that my absence may be misinterpreted; at a moment,
too, when all the others are reunited.”

“I would not hesitate to propose returning to the carriages,
Mademoiselle de la Valliere, but pray look and listen, and tell me if it
be possible to attempt to make the slightest progress at present?”

In fact the thunder was still rolling, and the rain continued to fall in
torrents.

“Besides,” continued the king, “no possible interpretation can be made
which would be to your discredit. Are you not with the king of France;
in other words, with the first gentleman of the kingdom?”

“Certainly, sire,” replied La Valliere, “and it is a very distinguished
honor for me; it is not, therefore, for myself that I fear any
interpretations that may be made.”

“For whom, then?”

“For you, sire.”

“For _me?_” said the king, smiling, “I do not understand you.”

“Has your majesty already forgotten what took place yesterday evening in
her royal highness’s apartments?”

“Oh! forget that, I beg, or allow me to remember it for no other purpose
than to thank you once more for your letter, and--”

“Sire,” interrupted La Valliere, “the rain is falling, and your
majesty’s head is uncovered.”

“I entreat you not to think of anything but yourself.”

“Oh! I,” said La Valliere, smiling, “I am a country girl, accustomed
to roaming through the meadows of the Loire and the gardens of Blois,
whatever the weather may be. And, as for my clothes,” she added, looking
at her simple muslin dress, “your majesty sees there is but little room
for injury.”

“Indeed, I have already noticed, more than once, that you owed nearly
everything to yourself and nothing to your toilette. Your freedom from
coquetry is one of your greatest charms in my eyes.”

“Sire, do not make me out better than I am, and say merely, ‘You cannot
possibly be a coquette.’”

“Why so?”

“Because,” said La Valliere, smiling, “I am not rich.”

“You admit, then,” said the king, quickly, “that you have a love for
beautiful things?”

“Sire, I only regard those things as beautiful which are within my
reach. Everything which is too highly placed for me--”

“You are indifferent to?”

“Is foreign to me, as being prohibited.”

“And I,” said the king, “do not find that you are at my court on
the footing you should be. The services of your family have not been
sufficiently brought under my notice. The advancement of your family was
cruelly neglected by my uncle.”

“On the contrary, sire. His royal highness, the Duke of Orleans, was
always exceedingly kind towards M. de Saint-Remy, my step-father. The
services rendered were humble, and, properly speaking, our services have
been adequately recognized. It is not every one who is happy enough to
find opportunities of serving his sovereign with distinction. I have no
doubt at all, that, if ever opportunities had been met with, my family’s
actions would have been as lofty as their loyalty was firm: but that
happiness was never ours.”

“In that case, Mademoiselle de la Valliere, it belongs to kings to
repair the want of opportunity, and most delightedly do I undertake to
repair, in your instance, and with the least possible delay, the wrongs
of fortune towards you.”

“Nay, sire,” cried La Valliere, eagerly; “leave things, I beg, as they
are now.”

“Is it possible! you refuse what I ought, and what I wish to do for
you?”

“All I desired has been granted me, when the honor was conferred upon me
of forming one of Madame’s household.”

“But if you refuse for yourself, at least accept for your family.”

“Your generous intentions, sire, bewilder me and make me apprehensive,
for, in doing for my family what your kindness urges you to do, your
majesty will raise up enemies for us, and enemies for yourself, too.
Leave me in the ranks of middle life, sire; of all the feelings and
sentiments I experience, leave me to enjoy the pleasing instinct of
disinterestedness.”

“The sentiments you express,” said the king, “are indeed admirable.”

“Quite true,” murmured Aramis in Fouquet’s ear, “and he cannot be
accustomed to them.”

“But,” replied Fouquet, “suppose she were to make a similar reply to my
letter.”

“True!” said Aramis, “let us not anticipate, but wait the conclusion.”

“And then, dear Monsieur d’Herblay,” added the superintendent, hardly
able to appreciate the sentiments which La Valliere had just expressed,
“it is very often sound calculation to seem disinterested with
monarchs.”

“Exactly what I was thinking this very minute,” said Aramis. “Let us
listen.”

The king approached nearer to La Valliere, and as the rain dripped more
and more through the foliage of the oak, he held his hat over the head
of the young girl, who raised her beautiful blue eyes towards the royal
hat which sheltered her, and shook her head, sighing deeply as she did
so.

“What melancholy thought,” said the king, “can possibly reach your heart
when I place mine as a rampart before it?”

“I will tell you, sire. I had already once before broached this
question, which is so difficult for a young girl of my age to discuss,
but your majesty imposed silence on me. Your majesty belongs not
to yourself alone: you are married; and every sentiment which would
separate your majesty from the queen, in leading you to take notice
of me, will be a source of profoundest sorrow for the queen.” The
king endeavored to interrupt the young girl, but she continued with a
suppliant gesture. “The Queen Maria, with an attachment which can be
well understood, follows with her eyes every step of your majesty which
separates you from her. Happy enough in having had her fate united to
your own, she weepingly implores Heaven to preserve you to her, and is
jealous of the faintest throb of your heart bestowed elsewhere.” The
king again seemed anxious to speak, but again did La Valliere venture to
prevent him.--“Would it not, therefore, be a most blamable action,” she
continued, “if your majesty, a witness of this anxious and disinterested
affection, gave the queen any cause for jealousy? Forgive me, sire, for
the expressions I have used. I well know it is impossible, or rather
that it would be impossible, that the greatest queen of the whole world
could be jealous of a poor girl like myself. But though a queen, she is
still a woman, and her heart, like that of the rest of her sex, cannot
close itself against the suspicions which such as are evilly disposed,
insinuate. For Heaven’s sake, sire, think no more of me; I am unworthy
of your regard.”

“Do you not know that in speaking as you have done, you change my esteem
for you into the profoundest admiration?”

“Sire, you assume my words to be contrary to the truth; you suppose me
to be better than I really am, and attach a greater merit to me than God
ever intended should be the case. Spare me, sire; for, did I not know
that your majesty was the most generous man in your kingdom, I should
believe you were jesting.”

“You do not, I know, fear such a thing; I am quite sure of that,”
 exclaimed Louis.

“I shall be obliged to believe it, if your majesty continues to hold
such language towards me.”

“I am most unhappy, then,” said the king, in a tone of regret which was
not assumed; “I am the unhappiest prince in the Christian world, since
I am powerless to induce belief in my words, in one whom I love the best
in the wide world, and who almost breaks my heart by refusing to credit
my regard for her.”

“Oh, sire!” said La Valliere, gently putting the king aside, who had
approached nearer to her, “I think the storm has passed away now, and
the rain has ceased.” At the very moment, however, as the poor girl,
fleeing as it were from her own heart, which doubtless throbbed but too
well in unison with the king’s, uttered these words, the storm undertook
to contradict her. A dead-white flash of lightning illumined the
forest with a weird glare, and a peal of thunder, like a discharge of
artillery, burst over their heads, as if the height of the oak that
sheltered them had attracted the storm. The young girl could not repress
a cry of terror. The king with one hand drew her towards his heart, and
stretched the other above her head, as though to shield her from the
lightning. A moment’s silence ensued, as the group, delightful as
everything young and loving is delightful, remained motionless, while
Fouquet and Aramis contemplated it in attitudes as motionless as La
Valliere and the king. “Oh, sire!” murmured La Valliere, “do you hear?”
 and her head fell upon his shoulder.

“Yes,” said the king. “You see, the storm has not passed away.”

“_It is a warning, sire_.” The king smiled. “Sire, it is the voice of
Heaven in anger.”

“Be it so,” said the king. “I agree to accept that peal of thunder as
a warning, and even as a menace, if, in five minutes from the present
moment, it is renewed with equal violence; but if not, permit me to
think that the storm is a storm simply, and nothing more.” And the king,
at the same moment, raised his head, as if to interrogate the heavens.
But, as if the remark had been heard and accepted, during the five
minutes which elapsed after the burst of thunder which had alarmed them,
no renewed peal was heard; and, when the thunder was again heard, it was
passing as plainly as if, during those same five minutes, the storm, put
to flight, had traversed the heavens with the wings of the wind. “Well,
Louise,” said the king, in a low tone of voice, “do you still threaten
me with the anger of Heaven? and, since you wished to regard the storm
as a warning, do you still believe it bodes misfortune?”

The young girl looked up, and saw that while they had been talking, the
rain had penetrated the foliage above them, and was trickling down
the king’s face. “Oh, sire, sire!” she exclaimed, in accents of eager
apprehensions, which greatly agitated the king. “Is it for me,” she
murmured, “that the king remains thus uncovered, and exposed to the
rain? What am I, then?”

“You are, you perceive,” said the king, “the divinity who dissipates the
storm, and brings back fine weather.” In fact, even as the king spoke,
a ray of sunlight streamed through the forest, and caused the rain-drops
which rested upon the leaves, or fell vertically among the openings in
the branches of the trees, to glisten like diamonds.

“Sire,” said La Valliere, almost overcome, but making a powerful effort
over herself, “think of the anxieties your majesty will have to submit
to on my account. At this very moment, they are seeking you in every
direction. The queen must be full of uneasiness; and Madame--oh,
Madame!” the young girl exclaimed, with an expression almost resembling
terror.

This name had a certain effect upon the king. He started, and disengaged
himself from La Valliere, whom he had, till that moment, held pressed
against his heart. He then advanced towards the path, in order to look
round, and returned, somewhat thoughtfully, to La Valliere. “Madame, did
you say?” he remarked.

“Yes, Madame; she, too, is jealous,” said La Valliere, with a marked
tone of voice; and her eyes, so timorous in their expression, and
so modestly fugitive in their glance, for a moment, ventured to look
inquiringly into the king’s.

“Still,” returned Louis, making an effort over himself, “it seems to me
that Madame has no reason, no right to be jealous of me.”

“Alas!” murmured La Valliere.

“Are you, too,” said the king, almost in a tone of reproach, “are
you among those who think the sister has a right to be jealous of the
brother?”

“It is not for me, sire, to seek to penetrate your majesty’s secrets.”

“You _do_ believe it, then?” exclaimed the king.

“I believe Madame is jealous, sire,” La Valliere replied, firmly.

“Is it possible,” said the king with some anxiety, “that you have
perceived it, then, from her conduct towards you? Have her manners
in any way been such towards you that you can attribute them to the
jealousy you speak of?”

“Not at all, sire; I am of so little importance.”

“Oh! if it were really the case--” exclaimed Louis, violently.

“Sire,” interrupted the young girl, “it has ceased raining; some one is
coming, I think.” And, forgetful of all etiquette, she had seized the
king by the arm.

“Well,” replied the king, “let them come. Who is there who would venture
to think I had done wrong in remaining alone with Mademoiselle de la
Valliere?”

“For pity’s sake, sire! they will think it strange to see you wet
through, in this manner, and that you should have run such risk for me.”

“I have simply done my duty as a gentleman,” said Louis; “and woe to him
who may fail in his, in criticising his sovereign’s conduct.” In fact,
at this moment a few eager and curious faces were seen in the walk, as
if engaged in a search. Catching glimpses at last of the king and La
Valliere, they seemed to have found what they were seeking. They were
some of the courtiers who had been sent by the queen and Madame, and
uncovered themselves, in token of having perceived his majesty. But
Louis, notwithstanding La Valliere’s confusion, did not quit his
respectful and tender attitude. Then, when all the courtiers were
assembled in the walk--when every one had been able to perceive the
extraordinary mark of deference with which he had treated the young
girl, by remaining standing and bare-headed during the storm--he offered
her his arm, led her towards the group who were waiting, recognized by
an inclination of the head the respectful salutations which were paid
him on all sides; and, still holding his hat in his hand, he conducted
her to her carriage. And, as a few sparse drops of rain continued
to fall--a last adieu of the vanishing storm--the other ladies, whom
respect had prevented from getting into their carriages before the king,
remained altogether unprotected by hood or cloak, exposed to the rain
from which the king was protecting, as well as he was able, the humblest
among them. The queen and Madame must, like the others, have witnessed
this exaggerated courtesy of the king. Madame was so disconcerted at
it, that she touched the queen with her elbow, saying at the same time,
“Look there, look there.”

The queen closed her eyes as if she had been suddenly seized with
a fainting-spell. She lifted her hands to her face and entered her
carriage, Madame following her. The king again mounted his horse,
and without showing a preference for any particular carriage door, he
returned to Fontainebleau, the reins hanging over his horse’s neck,
absorbed in thought. As soon as the crowd had disappeared, and the sound
of the horses and carriages grew fainter in the distance, and when they
were certain, in fact, that no one could see them, Aramis and Fouquet
came out of their grotto, and both of them in silence passed slowly
on towards the walk. Aramis looked most narrowly not only at the whole
extent of the open space stretching out before and behind him, but even
into the very depth of the wood.

“Monsieur Fouquet,” he said, when he had quite satisfied himself that
they were alone, “we must get back, at any cost, that letter you wrote
to La Valliere.”

“That will be easy enough,” said Fouquet, “if my servant has not given
it to her.”

“In any case it must be had, do you understand?”

“Yes. The king is in love with the girl, you mean?”

“Deeply, and what is worse is, that on her side, the girl is
passionately attached to him.”

“As much as to say that we must change our tactics, I suppose?”

“Not a doubt of it; you have no time to lose. You must see La Valliere,
and, without thinking any more of becoming her lover, which is out of
the question, must declare yourself her most devoted friend and her most
humble servant.”

“I will do so,” replied Fouquet, “and without the slightest feeling of
disinclination, for she seems a good-hearted girl.”

“Or a very clever one,” said Aramis; “but in that case, all the greater
reason.” Then he added, after a moment’s pause, “If I am not mistaken,
that girl will become the strongest passion of the king’s life. Let us
return to our carriage, and, as fast as possible, to the chateau.”



Chapter LXIII. Toby.

Two hours after the superintendent’s carriage had set off by Aramis’s
directions, conveying them both towards Fontainebleau with the fleetness
of the clouds the last breath of the tempest was hurrying across the
face of heaven, La Valliere was closeted in her own apartment, with a
simple muslin wrapper round her, having just finished a slight repast,
which was placed upon a marble table. Suddenly the door was opened,
and a servant entered to announce M. Fouquet, who had called to request
permission to pay his respects to her. She made him repeat the message
twice over, for the poor girl only knew M. Fouquet by name, and could
not conceive what business she could possibly have with a superintendent
of finances. However, as he might represent the king--and, after the
conversation we have recorded, it was very likely--she glanced at her
mirror, drew out still more the ringlets of her hair, and desired him
to be admitted. La Valliere could not, however, refrain from a certain
feeling of uneasiness. A visit from the superintendent was not an
ordinary event in the life of any woman attached to the court. Fouquet,
so notorious for his generosity, his gallantry, and his sensitive
delicacy of feeling with regard to women generally, had received
more invitations than he had requested audiences. In many houses, the
presence of the superintendent had been significant of fortune; in many
hearts, of love. Fouquet entered the apartment with a manner full of
respect, presenting himself with that ease and gracefulness of manner
which was the distinctive characteristic of the men of eminence of that
period, and which at the present day seems no longer to be understood,
even through the interpretation of the portraits of the period, in
which the painter has endeavored to recall them to being. La Valliere
acknowledged the ceremonious salutation which Fouquet addressed to her
by a gentle inclination of the head, and motioned him to a seat. But
Fouquet, with a bow, said, “I will not sit down until you have pardoned
me.”

“I?” asked La Valliere, “pardon what?”

Fouquet fixed a most piercing look upon the young girl, and fancied he
could perceive in her face nothing but the most unaffected surprise. “I
observe,” he said, “that you have as much generosity as intelligence,
and I read in your eyes the forgiveness I solicit. A pardon pronounced
by your lips is insufficient for me, and I need the forgiveness of your
heart and mind.”

“Upon my honor, monsieur,” said La Valliere, “I assure you most
positively I do not understand your meaning.”

“Again, that is a delicacy on your part which charms me,” replied
Fouquet, “and I see you do not wish me to blush before you.”

“Blush! blush before _me!_ Why should you blush?”

“Can I have deceived myself,” said Fouquet; “and can I have been happy
enough not to have offended you by my conduct towards you?”

“Really, monsieur,” said La Valliere, shrugging her shoulders, “you
speak in enigmas, and I suppose I am too ignorant to understand you.”

“Be it so,” said Fouquet; “I will not insist. Tell me, only, I entreat
you, that I may rely upon your full and complete forgiveness.”

“I have but one reply to make to you, monsieur,” said La Valliere,
somewhat impatiently, “and I hope that will satisfy you. If I knew the
wrong you have done me, I would forgive you, and I now do so with still
greater reason since I am ignorant of the wrong you allude to.”

Fouquet bit his lips, as Aramis would have done. “In that case,” he
said, “I may hope, that, notwithstanding what has happened, our good
understanding will remain undisturbed, and that you will kindly confer
the favor upon me of believing in my respectful friendship.”

La Valliere fancied that she now began to understand, and said to
herself, “I should not have believed M. Fouquet so eager to seek
the source of a favor so very recent,” and then added aloud, “Your
friendship, monsieur! you offer me your friendship. The honor, on the
contrary, is mine, and I feel overpowered by it.”

“I am aware,” replied Fouquet, “that the friendship of the master may
appear more brilliant and desirable than that of the servant; but I
assure you the latter will be quite as devoted, quite as faithful, and
altogether disinterested.”

La Valliere bowed, for, in fact, the voice of the superintendent seemed
to convey both conviction and real devotion in its tone, and she held
out her hand to him, saying, “I believe you.”

Fouquet eagerly took hold of the young girl’s hand. “You see no
difficulty, therefore,” he added, “in restoring me that unhappy letter.”

“What letter?” inquired La Valliere.

Fouquet interrogated her with his most searching gaze, as he had already
done before, but the same ingenious expressions, the same transparently
candid look met his. “I am obliged to confess,” he said, after this
denial, “that your heart is the most delicate in the world, and I should
not feel I was a man of honor and uprightness if I were to suspect
anything from a woman so generous as yourself.”

“Really, Monsieur Fouquet,” replied La Valliere, “it is with profound
regret I am obliged to repeat that I absolutely understand nothing of
what you refer to.”

“In fact, then, upon your honor, mademoiselle, you have not received any
letter from me?”

“Upon my honor, none,” replied La Valliere, firmly.

“Very well, that is quite sufficient; permit me, then, to renew the
assurance of my utmost esteem and respect,” said Fouquet. Then, bowing,
he left the room to seek Aramis, who was waiting for him in his
own apartment, and leaving La Valliere to ask herself whether the
superintendent had not lost his senses.

“Well!” inquired Aramis, who was impatiently waiting Fouquet’s return,
“are you satisfied with the favorite?”

“Enchanted,” replied Fouquet; “she is a woman full of intelligence and
fine feeling.”

“She did not get angry, then?”

“Far from that--she did not even seem to understand.”

“To understand what?”

“To understand that I had written to her.”

“She must, however, have understood you sufficiently to give the letter
back to you, for I presume she returned it.”

“Not at all.”

“At least, you satisfied yourself that she had burnt it.”

“My dear Monsieur d’Herblay, I have been playing at cross-purposes for
more than an hour, and, however amusing it may be, I begin to have had
enough of this game. So understand me thoroughly: the girl pretended not
to understand what I was saying to her; she denied having received any
letter; therefore, having positively denied its receipt, she was unable
either to return or burn it.”

“Oh, oh!” said Aramis, with uneasiness, “what is this you tell me?”

“I say that she swore most positively she had not received any letter.”

“That is too much. And did you not insist?”

“On the contrary, I did insist, almost impertinently even.”

“And she persisted in her denial?”

“Unhesitatingly.”

“And did she not contradict herself?”

“Not once.”

“But, in that case, then, you have left our letter in her hands?”

“How could I do otherwise?”

“Oh! it was a great mistake.”

“What the deuce would you have done in my place?”

“One could not force her, certainly, but it is very embarrassing; such a
letter ought not to remain in existence against us.”

“Oh! the young girl’s disposition is generosity itself; I looked at her
eyes, and I can read eyes well.”

“You think she can be relied upon?”

“From my heart I do.”

“Well, I think we are mistaken.”

“In what way?”

“I think that, in point of fact, as she herself told you, she did not
receive the letter.”

“What! do you suppose--”

“I suppose that, from some motive, of which we know nothing, your man
did not deliver the letter to her.”

Fouquet rang the bell. A servant appeared. “Send Toby here,” he said. A
moment afterwards a man made his appearance, with an anxious, restless
look, shrewd expression of the mouth, with short arms, and his back
somewhat bent. Aramis fixed a penetrating look upon him.

“Will you allow me to interrogate him myself?” inquired Aramis.

“Do so,” said Fouquet.

Aramis was about to say something to the lackey, when he paused. “No,”
 he said; “he would see that we attach too much importance to his answer;
therefore question him yourself; I will pretend to be writing.” Aramis
accordingly placed himself at a table, his back turned towards the old
attendant, whose every gesture and look he watched in a looking-glass
opposite to him.

“Come here, Toby,” said Fouquet to the valet, who approached with a
tolerably firm step. “How did you execute my commission?” inquired
Fouquet.

“In the usual way, monseigneur,” replied the man.

“But how, tell me?”

“I succeeded in penetrating as far as Mademoiselle de la Valliere’s
apartment; but she was at mass, and so I placed the note on her
toilette-table. Is not that what you told me to do?”

“Precisely; and is that all?”

“Absolutely all, monseigneur.”

“No one was there?”

“No one.”

“Did you conceal yourself as I told you?”

“Yes.”

“And she returned?”

“Ten minutes afterwards.”

“And no one could have taken the letter?”

“No one; for no one had entered the room.”

“From the outside, but from the interior?”

“From the place where I was secreted, I could see to the very end of the
room.”

“Now listen to me,” said Fouquet, looking fixedly at the lackey; “if
this letter did not reach its proper destination, confess it; for, if a
mistake has been made, your head shall be the forfeit.”

Toby started, but immediately recovered himself. “Monseigneur,” he said,
“I placed the letter on the very place I told you: and I ask only
half an hour to prove to you that the letter is in Mademoiselle de la
Valliere’s hand, or to bring you back the letter itself.”

Aramis looked at the valet scrutinizingly. Fouquet was ready in placing
confidence in people, and for twenty years this man had served him
faithfully. “Go,” he said; “but bring me the proof you speak of.” The
lackey quitted the room.

“Well, what do you think of it?” inquired Fouquet of Aramis.

“I think that you must, by some means or another, assure yourself of
the truth, either that the letter has, or has not, reached La Valliere;
that, in the first case, La Valliere must return it to you, or satisfy
you by burning it in your presence; that, in the second, you must have
the letter back again, even were it to cost you a million. Come, is not
that your opinion?”

“Yes; but still, my dear bishop, I believe you are exaggerating the
importance of the affair.”

“Blind, how blind you are!” murmured Aramis.

“La Valliere,” returned Fouquet, “whom we assume to be a schemer of the
first ability, is simply nothing more than a coquette, who hopes that I
shall pay my court to her, because I have already done so, and who, now
that she has received a confirmation of the king’s regard, hopes to keep
me in leading strings with the letter. It is natural enough.”

Aramis shook his head.

“Is not that your opinion?” said Fouquet.

“She is not a coquette,” he replied.

“Allow me to tell you--”

“Oh! I am well enough acquainted with women who are coquettes,” said
Aramis.

“My dear friend!”

“It is a long time ago since I finished my education, you mean. But
women are the same, throughout the centuries.”

“True; but men change, and you at the present day are far more
suspicious than you formerly were.” And then, beginning to laugh, he
added, “Come, if La Valliere is willing to love me only to the extent
of a third, and the king two-thirds, do you think the condition
acceptable?”

Aramis rose impatiently. “La Valliere,” he said, “has never loved, and
never will love, any one but the king.”

“At all events,” said Fouquet, “what would you do?”

“Ask me rather what I would have done?”

“Well! what would you have done?”

“In the first place, I should not have allowed that man to depart.”

“Toby?”

“Yes; Toby is a traitor. Nay, I am sure of it, and I would not have let
him go until he had told me the truth.”

“There is still time. I will recall him, and do you question him in your
turn.”

“Agreed.”

“But I assure you it is useless. He has been with me for twenty years,
and has never made the slightest mistake, and yet,” added Fouquet,
laughing, “it would have been easy enough for him to have done so.”

“Still, call him back. This morning I fancy I saw that face, in earnest
conversation with one of M. Colbert’s men.”

“Where was that?”

“Opposite the stables.”

“Bah! all my people are at daggers drawn with that fellow.”

“I saw him, I tell you, and his face, which should have been unknown to
me when he entered just now, struck me as disagreeably familiar.”

“Why did you not say something, then, while he was here?”

“Because it is only at this very minute that my memory is clear upon the
subject.”

“Really,” said Fouquet, “you alarm me.” And he again rang the bell.

“Provided that it is not already too late,” said Aramis.

Fouquet once more rang impatiently. The valet usually in attendance
appeared. “Toby!” said Fouquet, “send Toby.” The valet again shut the
door.

“You leave me at perfect liberty, I suppose?”

“Entirely so.”

“I may employ all means, then, to ascertain the truth.”

“All.”

“Intimidation, even?”

“I constitute you public prosecutor in my place.”

They waited ten minutes longer, but uselessly, and Fouquet, thoroughly
out of patience, again rang loudly.

“Toby!” he exclaimed.

“Monseigneur,” said the valet, “they are looking for him.”

“He cannot be far distant, I have not given him any commission to
execute.”

“I will go and see, monseigneur,” replied the valet, as he closed the
door. Aramis, during the interview, walked impatiently, but without a
syllable, up and down the cabinet. They waited a further ten minutes.
Fouquet rang in a manner to alarm the very dead. The valet again
presented himself, trembling in a way to induce a belief that he was the
bearer of bad news.

“Monseigneur is mistaken,” he said, before even Fouquet could
interrogate him, “you must have given Toby some commission, for he
has been to the stables and taken your lordship’s swiftest horse, and
saddled it himself.”

“Well?”

“And he has gone off.”

“Gone!” exclaimed Fouquet. “Let him be pursued, let him be captured.”

“Nay, nay,” whispered Aramis, taking him by the hand, “be calm, the evil
is done.”

The valet quietly went out.

“The evil is done, you say?”

“No doubt; I was sure of it. And now, let us give no cause for
suspicion; we must calculate the result of the blow, and ward it off, if
possible.”

“After all,” said Fouquet, “the evil is not great.”

“You think so?” said Aramis.

“Of course. Surely a man is allowed to write a love-letter to a woman.”

“A man, certainly; a subject, no; especially, too, when the woman in
question is one with whom the king is in love.”

“But the king was not in love with La Valliere a week ago! he was not in
love with her yesterday, and the letter is dated yesterday; I could not
guess the king was in love, when the king’s affection was not even yet
in existence.”

“As you please,” replied Aramis; “but unfortunately the letter is not
dated, and it is that circumstance particularly which annoys me. If it
had only been dated yesterday, I should not have the slightest shadow of
uneasiness on your account.”

Fouquet shrugged his shoulders.

“Am I not my own master,” he said, “and is the king, then, king of my
brain and of my flesh?”

“You are right,” replied Aramis, “do not let us attach greater
importance to matters than is necessary; and besides... Well! if we are
menaced, we have means of defense.”

“Oh! menaced!” said Fouquet, “you do not place this gnat bite, as it
were, among the number of menaces which may compromise my fortune and my
life, do you?”

“Do not forget, Monsieur Fouquet, that the bit of an insect can kill a
giant, if the insect be venomous.”

“But has this sovereign power you were speaking of, already vanished?”

“I am all-powerful, it is true, but I am not immortal.”

“Come, then, the most pressing matter is to find Toby again, I suppose.
Is not that your opinion?”

“Oh! as for that, you will not find him again,” said Aramis, “and if he
were of any great value to you, you must give him up for lost.”

“At all events he is somewhere or another in the world,” said Fouquet.

“You’re right, let me act,” replied Aramis.



Chapter LXIV. Madame’s Four Chances.

Anne of Austria had begged the young queen to pay her a visit. For some
time past suffering most acutely, and losing both her youth and beauty
with that rapidity which signalizes the decline of women for whom life
has been one long contest, Anne of Austria had, in addition to her
physical sufferings, to experience the bitterness of being no longer
held in any esteem, except as a surviving remembrance of the past,
amidst the youthful beauties, wits, and influential forces of her court.
Her physician’s opinions, her mirror also, grieved her far less than the
inexorable warnings which the society of the courtiers afforded, who,
like rats in a ship, abandon the hold into which on the very next voyage
the water will infallibly penetrate, owing to the ravages of decay. Anne
of Austria did not feel satisfied with the time her eldest son devoted
to her. The king, a good son, more from affectation than from affection,
had at first been in the habit of passing an hour in the morning and one
in the evening with his mother; but, since he had himself undertaken
the conduct of state affairs, the duration of the morning and evening’s
visit had been reduced by one half; and then, by degrees, the morning
visit had been suppressed altogether. They met at mass; the evening
visit was replaced by a meeting, either at the king’s assembly or at
Madame’s, which the queen attended obligingly enough, out of regard to
her two sons.

The result of this was, that Madame gradually acquired an immense
influence over the court, which made her apartments the true royal place
of meeting. This, Anne of Austria perceived; knowing herself to be very
ill, and condemned by her sufferings to frequent retirement, she was
distressed at the idea that the greater part of her future days and
evenings would pass away solitary, useless, and in despondency. She
recalled with terror the isolation in which Cardinal Richelieu had
formerly left her, those dreaded and insupportable evenings, during
which, however, she had both youth and beauty, which are ever
accompanied by hope, to console her. She next formed the project of
transporting the court to her own apartments, and of attracting Madame,
with her brilliant escort, to her gloomy and already sorrowful abode,
where the widow of a king of France, and the mother of a king of France,
was reduced to console, in her artificial widowhood, the weeping wife of
a king of France.

Anne began to reflect. She had intrigued a good deal in her life. In
the good times past, when her youthful mind nursed projects that were,
ultimately, invariably successful, she had by her side, to stimulate
her ambition and her love, a friend of her own sex, more eager, more
ambitious than herself,--a friend who had loved her, a rare circumstance
at courts, and whom some petty considerations had removed from her
forever. But for many years past--except Madame de Motteville, and La
Molena, her Spanish nurse, a confidante in her character of countrywoman
and woman too--who could boast of having given good advice to the queen?
Who, too, among all the youthful heads there, could recall the past for
her,--that past in which alone she lived? Anne of Austria remembered
Madame de Chevreuse, in the first place exiled rather by her wish than
the king’s, and then dying in exile, the wife of a gentleman of obscure
birth and position. She asked herself what Madame de Chevreuse would
have advised her to do in similar circumstances, in their mutual
difficulties arising from their intrigues; and after serious reflection,
it seemed as if the clever, subtle mind of her friend, full of
experience and sound judgment, answered her in the well-remembered
ironical tones: “All the insignificant young people are poor and greedy
of gain. They require gold and incomes to supply means of amusement;
it is by interest you must gain them over.” And Anne of Austria adopted
this plan. Her purse was well filled, and she had at her disposal a
considerable sum of money, which had been amassed by Mazarin for her,
and lodged in a place of safety. She possessed the most magnificent
jewels in France, and especially pearls of a size so large that they
made the king sigh every time he saw them, because the pearls of his
crown were like millet seed compared to them. Anne of Austria had
neither beauty nor charms any longer at her disposal. She gave out,
therefore, that her wealth was great, and as an inducement for others
to visit her apartments she let it be known that there were good gold
crowns to be won at play, or that handsome presents were likely to be
made on days when all went well with her; or windfalls, in the shape of
annuities which she had wrung from the king by entreaty, and thus she
determined to maintain her credit. In the first place, she tried these
means upon Madame; because to gain her consent was of more importance
than anything else. Madame, notwithstanding the bold confidence which
her wit and beauty inspired her, blindly ran head foremost into the net
thus stretched out to catch her. Enriched by degrees by these presents
and transfers of property, she took a fancy to inheritances by
anticipation. Anne of Austria adopted the same means towards Monsieur,
and even towards the king himself. She instituted lotteries in her
apartments. The day on which the present chapter opens, invitations had
been issued for a late supper in the queen-mother’s apartments, as she
intended that two beautiful diamond bracelets of exquisite workmanship
should be put into a lottery. The medallions were antique cameos of
the greatest value; the diamonds, in point of intrinsic value, did not
represent a very considerable amount, but the originality and rarity of
the workmanship were such, that every one at court not only wished to
possess the bracelets, but even to see the queen herself wear them; for,
on the days she wore them, it was considered as a favor to be admitted
to admire them in kissing her hands. The courtiers had, even with regard
to this subject, adopted various expressions of gallantry to establish
the aphorism, that the bracelets would have been priceless in value if
they had not been unfortunate enough to be placed in contact with arms
as beautiful as the queen’s. This compliment had been honored by a
translation into all the languages of Europe, and numerous verses in
Latin and French had been circulated on the subject. The day that Anne
of Austria had selected for the lottery was a decisive moment; the king
had not been near his mother for a couple of days; Madame, after the
great scene of the Dryads and Naiads, was sulking by herself. It
is true, the king’s fit of resentment was over, but his mind was
absorbingly occupied by a circumstance that raised him above the stormy
disputes and giddy pleasures of the court.

Anne of Austria effected a diversion by the announcement of the famous
lottery to take place in her apartments on the following evening. With
this object in view, she saw the young queen, whom, as we have already
seen, she had invited to pay her a visit in the morning. “I have good
news to tell you,” she said to her; “the king has been saying the most
tender things about you. He is young, you know, and easily drawn away;
but so long as you keep near me, he will not venture to keep away from
you, to whom, besides, he is most warmly and affectionately attached. I
intend to have a lottery this evening and shall expect to see you.”

“I have heard,” said the young queen, with a sort of timid reproach,
“that your majesty intends to put in the lottery those lovely bracelets
whose rarity is so great that we ought not to allow them to pass out of
the custody of the crown, even were there no other reason than that they
had once belonged to you.”

“My daughter,” said Anne of Austria, who read the young queen’s
thoughts, and wished to console her for not having received the
bracelets as a present, “it is positively necessary that I should induce
Madame to pass her time in my apartments.”

“Madame!” said the young queen, blushing.

“Of course: would you not prefer to have a rival near you, whom you
could watch and influence, to knowing the king is with her, always as
ready to flirt as to be flirted with by her? The lottery I have proposed
is my means of attraction for that purpose; do you blame me?”

“Oh, no!” returned Maria Theresa, clapping her hands with a childlike
expression of delight.

“And you no longer regret, then, that I did not give you these
bracelets, as I at first intended to do?”

“Oh, no, no!”

“Very well; make yourself look as beautiful as possible that our supper
may be very brilliant; the gayer you seem, the more charming you appear,
and you will eclipse all the ladies present as much by your brilliancy
as by your rank.”

Maria Theresa left full of delight. An hour afterwards, Anne of Austria
received a visit from Madame, whom she covered with caresses, saying,
“Excellent news! the king is charmed with my lottery.”

“But I,” replied Madame, “am not so greatly charmed: to see such
beautiful bracelets on any one’s arms but yours or mine, is what I
cannot reconcile myself to.”

“Well, well,” said Anne of Austria, concealing by a smile a violent
pang she had just experienced, “do not look at things in the worst light
immediately.”

“Ah, Madame, Fortune is blind, and I am told there are two hundred
tickets.”

“Quite as many as that; but you cannot surely forget that there can only
be one winner.”

“No doubt. But who will that be? Can you tell?” said Madame, in despair.

“You remind me that I had a dream last night; my dreams are always
good,--I sleep so little.”

“What was your dream?--but are you suffering?”

“No,” said the queen, stifling with wonderful command the torture of a
renewed attack of shooting pains in her bosom; “I dreamed that the king
won the bracelets.”

“The king!”

“You are going to ask me, I think, what the king could possibly do with
the bracelets?”

“Yes.”

“And you would not add, perhaps, that it would be very fortunate if the
king were really to win, for he would be obliged to give the bracelets
to some one else.”

“To restore them to you, for instance.”

“In which case I should immediately give them away; for you do not
think, I suppose,” said the queen, laughing, “that I have put these
bracelets up to a lottery from necessity. My object was to give them
without arousing any one’s jealousy; but if Fortune will not get me out
of my difficulty--well, I will teach Fortune a lesson--and I know
very well to whom I intend to offer the bracelets.” These words were
accompanied by so expressive a smile, that Madame could not resist
paying her by a grateful kiss.

“But,” added Anne of Austria, “do you not know, as well as I do, that if
the king were to win the bracelets, he would not restore them to me?”

“You mean he would give them to the queen?”

“No; and for the very same reason that he would not give them back again
to me; since, if I had wished to make the queen a present of them, I had
no need of him for that purpose.”

Madame cast a side glance upon the bracelets, which, in their casket,
were dazzlingly exposed to view upon a table close beside her.

“How beautiful they are,” she said, sighing. “But stay,” Madame
continued, “we are quite forgetting that your majesty’s dream was
nothing but a dream.”

“I should be very much surprised,” returned Anne of Austria, “if my
dream were to deceive me; that has happened to me very seldom.”

“We may look upon you as a prophetess, then.”

“I have already said, that I dream but very rarely; but the coincidence
of my dream about this matter, with my own ideas, is extraordinary! it
agrees so wonderfully with my own views and arrangements.”

“What arrangements do you allude to?”

“That you will get the bracelets, for instance.”

“In that case, it will not be the king.”

“Oh!” said Anne of Austria, “there is not such a very great distance
between his majesty’s heart and your own; for, are you not his sister,
for whom he has a great regard? There is not, I repeat, so very wide a
distance, that my dream can be pronounced false on that account. Come,
let us reckon up the chances in its favor.”

“I will count them.”

“In the first place, we will begin with the dream. If the king wins, he
is sure to give you the bracelets.”

“I admit that is one.”

“If you win them, they are yours.”

“Naturally; that may be admitted also.”

“Lastly;--if Monsieur were to win them!”

“Oh!” said Madame, laughing heartily, “he would give them to the
Chevalier de Lorraine.”

Anne of Austria laughed as heartily as her daughter-in-law; so much so,
indeed, that her sufferings again returned, and made her turn suddenly
pale in the very midst of her enjoyment.

“What is the matter?” inquired Madame, terrified.

“Nothing, nothing; a pain in my side. I have been laughing too much. We
were at the fourth chance, I think.”

“I cannot see a fourth.”

“I beg your pardon; I am not excluded from the chance of winning, and if
I be the winner, you are sure of me.”

“Oh! thank you, thank you!” exclaimed Madame.

“I hope that you look upon yourself as one whose chances are good, and
that my dream now begins to assure the solid outlines of reality.”

“Yes, indeed: you give me both hope and confidence,” said Madame, “and
the bracelets, won in this manner, will be a hundred times more precious
to me.”

“Well! then, good-bye, until this evening.” And the two princesses
separated. Anne of Austria, after her daughter-in-law had left her, said
to herself, as she examined the bracelets, “They are, indeed, precious;
since, by their means, this evening, I shall have won over a heart to my
side, at the same time, fathomed an important secret.”

Then turning towards the deserted recess in her room, she said,
addressing vacancy,--“Is it not thus that you would have acted, my poor
Chevreuse? Yes, yes; I know it is.”

And, like a perfume of other, fairer days, her youth, her imagination,
and her happiness seemed to be wafted towards the echo of this
invocation.



Chapter LXV. The Lottery.

By eight o’clock in the evening, every one had assembled in the
queen-mother’s apartments. Anne of Austria, in full dress, beautiful
still, from former loveliness, and from all the resources coquetry
can command at the hands of clever assistants, concealed, or rather
pretended to conceal, from the crowd of courtiers who surrounded her,
and who still admired her, thanks to the combination of circumstances
which we have indicated in the preceding chapter, the ravages, which
were already visible, of the acute suffering to which she finally
yielded a few years later. Madame, almost as great a coquette as Anne of
Austria, and the queen, simple and natural as usual, were seated beside
her, each contending for her good graces. The ladies of honor, united
in a body, in order to resist with greater effect, and consequently with
more success, the witty and lively conversations which the young men
held about them, were enabled, like a battalion formed in a square,
to offer each other the means of attack and defense which were thus
at their command. Montalais, learned in that species of warfare which
consists of sustained skirmishing, protected the whole line by a sort
of rolling fire she directed against the enemy. Saint-Aignan, in utter
despair at the rigor, which became almost insulting from the very fact
of her persisting in it, Mademoiselle de Tonnay-Charente displayed,
tried to turn his back upon her; but, overcome by the irresistible
brilliancy of her eyes, he, every moment, returned to consecrate his
defeat by new submissions, to which Mademoiselle de Tonnay-Charente did
not fail to reply by fresh acts of impertinence. Saint-Aignan did not
know which way to turn. La Valliere had about her, not exactly a court,
but sprinklings of courtiers. Saint-Aignan, hoping by this maneuver to
attract Athenais’s attention towards him, approached the young girl, and
saluted her with a respect that induced some to believe that he wished
to balance Athenais by Louise. But these were persons who had neither
been witnesses of the scene during the shower, nor had heard it spoken
of. As the majority was already informed, and well informed, too, on the
matter, the acknowledged favor with which she was regarded had attracted
to her side some of the most astute, as well as the least sensible,
members of the court. The former, because they said with Montaigne,
“How do I know?” and the latter, who said with Rabelais, “Perhaps.”
 The greatest number had followed in the wake of the latter, just as in
hunting five or six of the best hounds alone follow the scent of the
animal hunted, whilst the remainder of the pack follow only the scent of
the hounds. The two queens and Madame examined with particular attention
the toilettes of their ladies and maids of honor; and they condescended
to forget they were queens in recollecting that they were women. In
other words, they pitilessly picked to pieces every person present who
wore a petticoat. The looks of both princesses simultaneously fell upon
La Valliere, who, as we have just said, was completely surrounded
at that moment. Madame knew not what pity was, and said to the
queen-mother, as she turned towards her, “If Fortune were just, she
would favor that poor La Valliere.”

“That is not possible,” said the queen-mother, smiling.

“Why not?”

“There are only two hundred tickets, so that it was not possible to
inscribe every one’s name on the list.”

“And hers is not there, then?”

“No!”

“What a pity! she might have won them, and then sold them.”

“Sold them!” exclaimed the queen.

“Yes; it would have been a dowry for her, and she would not have been
obliged to marry without her _trousseau_, as will probably be the case.”

“Really,” answered the queen-mother, “poor little thing: has she no
dresses, then?”

And she pronounced these words like a woman who has never been able to
understand the inconveniences of a slenderly filled purse.

“Stay, look at her. Heaven forgive me, if she is not wearing the very
same petticoat this evening that she had on this morning during the
promenade, and which she managed to keep clean, thanks to the care the
king took of her, in sheltering her from the rain.”

At the very moment Madame uttered these words the king entered the
room. The two queens would not perhaps have observed his arrival, so
completely were they occupied in their ill-natured remarks, had not
Madame noticed that, all at once, La Valliere, who was standing up
facing the gallery, exhibited certain signs of confusion, and then
said a few words to the courtiers who surrounded her, who immediately
dispersed. This movement induced Madame to look towards the door, and
at that moment, the captain of the guards announced the king. At this
moment La Valliere, who had hitherto kept her eyes fixed upon the
gallery, suddenly cast them down as the king entered. His majesty was
dressed magnificently and in the most perfect taste; he was conversing
with Monsieur and the Duc de Roquelaure, Monsieur on his right, and the
Duc de Roquelaure on his left. The king advanced, in the first place,
towards the queens, to whom he bowed with an air full of graceful
respect. He took his mother’s hand and kissed it, addressed a few
compliments to Madame upon the beauty of her toilette, and then began
to make the round of the assembly. La Valliere was saluted in the same
manner as the others, but with neither more nor less attention. His
majesty then returned to his mother and his wife. When the courtiers
noticed that the king had only addressed some ordinary remark to the
young girl who had been so particularly noticed in the morning, they
immediately drew their own conclusion to account for this coldness of
manner; this conclusion being, that although the king may have taken
a sudden fancy to her, that fancy had already disappeared. One thing,
however, must be remarked, that close beside La Valliere, among the
number of the courtiers, M. Fouquet was to be seen; and his respectfully
attentive manner served to sustain the young girl in the midst of the
varied emotions that visibly agitated her.

M. Fouquet was just on the point, moreover, of speaking in a more
friendly manner with Mademoiselle de la Valliere, when M. Colbert
approached, and after having bowed to Fouquet with all the formality of
respectful politeness, he seemed to take up a post beside La Valliere,
for the purpose of entering into conversation with her. Fouquet
immediately quitted his place. These proceedings were eagerly devoured
by the eyes of Montalais and Malicorne, who mutually exchanged their
observations on the subject. De Guiche, standing within the embrasure of
one of the windows, saw no one but Madame. But as Madame, on her side,
frequently glanced at La Valliere, De Guiche’s eyes, following
Madame’s, were from time to time cast upon the young girl. La Valliere
instinctively felt herself sinking beneath the weight of all these
different looks, inspired, some by interest, others by envy. She had
nothing to compensate her for her sufferings, not a kind word from her
companions, nor a look of affection from the king. No one could possibly
express the misery the poor girl was suffering. The queen-mother
next directed the small table to be brought forward, on which the
lottery-tickets were placed, two hundred in number, and begged Madame de
Motteville to read the list of the names. It was a matter of course
that this list had been drawn out in strict accordance with the laws of
etiquette. The king’s name was first on the list, next the queen-mother,
then the queen, Monsieur, Madame, and so on. All hearts throbbed
anxiously as the list was read out; more than three hundred persons had
been invited, and each of them was anxious to learn whether his or
her name was to be found in the number of privileged names. The king
listened with as much attention as the others, and when the last name
had been pronounced, he noticed that La Valliere had been omitted from
the list. Every one, of course, remarked this omission. The king flushed
as if much annoyed; but La Valliere, gentle and resigned, as usual,
exhibited nothing of the sort. While the list was being read, the king
had not taken his eyes off the young girl, who seemed to expand, as it
were, beneath the happy influence she felt was shed around her, and who
was delighted and too pure in spirit for any other thought than that of
love to find an entrance either to her mind or her heart. Acknowledging
this touching self-denial by the fixity of his attention, the king
showed La Valliere how much he appreciated its delicacy. When the list
was finished, the different faces of those who had been omitted or
forgotten fully expressed their disappointment. Malicorne was also
left out from amongst the men; and the grimace he made plainly said
to Montalais, who was also forgotten, “Cannot we contrive to arrange
matters with Fortune in such a manner that she shall not forget us?”
 to which a smile full of intelligence from Mademoiselle Aure, replied:
“Certainly we can.”

The tickets were distributed to each according to the number listed. The
king received his first, next the queen-mother, then Monsieur, then the
queen and Madame, and so on. After this, Anne of Austria opened a small
Spanish leather bag, containing two hundred numbers engraved upon small
balls of mother-of-pearl, and presented the open sack to the youngest
of her maids of honor, for the purpose of taking one of the balls out of
it. The eager expectation of the throng, amidst all the tediously slow
preparations, was rather that of cupidity than curiosity. Saint-Aignan
bent towards Mademoiselle de Tonnay-Charente to whisper to her, “Since
we have each a number, let us unite our two chances. The bracelet shall
be yours if I win, and if you are successful, deign to give me but one
look of your beautiful eyes.”

“No,” said Athenais, “if you win the bracelet, keep it, every one for
himself.”

“You are without any pity,” said Saint-Aignan, “and I will punish you by
a quatrain:--

“Beautiful Iris, to my vows You are too opposed--”

“Silence,” said Athenais, “you will prevent me hearing the winning
number.”

“Number one,” said the young girl who had drawn the mother-of-pearl from
the Spanish leather bag.

“The king!” exclaimed the queen-mother.

“The king has won,” repeated the queen, delightedly.

“Oh! the king! your dream!” said Madame, joyously, in the ear of Anne of
Austria.

The king was the only one who did not exhibit any satisfaction. He
merely thanked Fortune for what she had done for him, in addressing a
slight salutation to the young girl who had been chosen as her proxy.
Then receiving from the hands of Anne of Austria, amid the eager desire
of the whole assembly, the casket inclosing the bracelets, he said, “Are
these bracelets really beautiful, then?”

“Look at them,” said Anne of Austria, “and judge for yourself.”

The king looked at them, and said, “Yes, indeed, an admirable medallion.
What perfect finish!”

Queen Maria Theresa easily saw, and that, too at the very first glance,
that the king would not offer the bracelets to her; but, as he did not
seem the least degree in the world disposed to offer them to Madame,
she felt almost satisfied, or nearly so. The king sat down. The most
intimate among the courtiers approached, one by one, for the purpose of
admiring more closely the beautiful piece of workmanship, which soon,
with the king’s permission, was handed about from person to person.
Immediately, every one, connoisseurs or not, uttered various
exclamations of surprise, and overwhelmed the king with congratulations.
There was, in fact, something for everybody to admire--the brilliance
for some, and the cutting for others. The ladies present visibly
displayed their impatience to see such a treasure monopolized by the
gentlemen.

“Gentlemen, gentlemen,” said the king, whom nothing escaped, “one would
almost think that you wore bracelets as the Sabines used to do; hand
them round for a while for the inspection of the ladies, who seem to
have, and with far greater right, an excuse for understanding such
matters!”

These words appeared to Madame the commencement of a decision she
expected. She gathered, besides, this happy belief from the glances of
the queen-mother. The courtier who held them at the moment the king
made this remark, amidst the general agitation, hastened to place the
bracelets in the hands of the queen, Maria Theresa, who, knowing too
well, poor woman, that they were not designed for her, hardly looked at
them, and almost immediately passed them on to Madame. The latter, and
even more minutely, Monsieur, gave the bracelets a long look of anxious
and almost covetous desire. She then handed the jewels to those ladies
who were near her, pronouncing this single word, but with an accent
which was worth a long phrase, “Magnificent!”

The ladies who had received the bracelets from Madame’s hands looked at
them as long as they chose to examine them, and then made them circulate
by passing them on towards the right. During this time the king was
tranquilly conversing with De Guiche and Fouquet, rather passively
letting them talk than himself listening. Accustomed to the set form
of ordinary phrases, his ear, like that of all men who exercise
an incontestable superiority over others, merely selected from the
conversations held in various directions the indispensable word which
requires reply. His attention, however, was now elsewhere, for it
wandered as his eyes did.

Mademoiselle de Tonnay-Charente was the last of the ladies inscribed for
tickets; and, as if she had ranked according to her name upon the list,
she had only Montalais and La Valliere near her. When the bracelets
reached these two latter, no one appeared to take any further notice of
them. The humble hands which for a moment touched these jewels, deprived
them, for the time, of their importance--a circumstance which did not,
however, prevent Montalais from starting with joy, envy, and covetous
desire, at the sight of the beautiful stones still more than at their
magnificent workmanship. It is evident that if she were compelled to
decide between the pecuniary value and the artistic beauty, Montalais
would unhesitatingly have preferred diamonds to cameos, and her
disinclination, therefore, to pass them on to her companion,
La Valliere, was very great. La Valliere fixed a look almost of
indifference upon the jewels.

“Oh, how beautiful, how magnificent these bracelets are!” exclaimed
Montalais; “and yet you do not go into ecstasies about them, Louise! You
are no true woman, I am sure.”

“Yes, I am, indeed,” replied the young girl, with an accent of the
most charming melancholy; “but why desire that which can never, by any
possibility, be ours?”

The king, his head bent forward, was listening to what Louise was
saying. Hardly had the vibration of her voice reached his ear than he
rose, radiant with delight, and passing across the whole assembly,
from the place where he stood, to La Valliere, “You are mistaken,
mademoiselle,” he said, “you are a woman, and every woman has a right to
wear jewels, which are a woman’s appurtenance.”

“Oh, sire!” said La Valliere, “your majesty will not absolutely believe
in my modesty?”

“I believe you possess every virtue, mademoiselle; frankness as well as
every other; I entreat you, therefore, to say frankly what you think of
these bracelets?”

“That they are beautiful, sire, and cannot be offered to any other than
a queen.”

“I am delighted that such is your opinion, mademoiselle; the bracelets
are yours, and the king begs your acceptance of them.”

And as, with a movement almost resembling terror, La Valliere eagerly
held out the casket to the king, the king gently pushed back her
trembling hand.

A silence of astonishment, more profound than that of death, reigned in
the assembly.

And yet, from the side where the queens were, no one had heard what he
had said, nor understood what he had done. A charitable friend, however,
took upon herself to spread the news; it was Tonnay-Charente, to whom
Madame had made a sign to approach.

“Good heavens!” explained Tonnay-Charente, “how happy that La Valliere
is! the king has just given her the bracelets.”

Madame bit her lips to such a degree that the blood appeared upon the
surface of the skin. The young queen looked first at La Valliere and
then at Madame, and began to laugh. Anne of Austria rested her chin upon
her beautiful white hand, and remained for a long time absorbed by a
presentiment that disturbed her mind, and by a terrible pang which stung
her heart. De Guiche, observing Madame turn pale, and guessing the cause
of her change of color, abruptly quitted the assembly and disappeared.
Malicorne was then able to approach Montalais very quietly, and under
cover of the general din of conversation, said to her:

“Aure, your fortune and our future are standing at your elbow.”

“Yes,” was her reply, as she tenderly embraced La Valliere, whom,
inwardly, she was tempted to strangle.